Ideas and Options
in
English for Specific Purposes

ESL & Applied Linguistics Professional Series
Eli Hinkel, Series Editor
Nero, Ed. • Dialects, Englishes, Creoles, and Education
Basturkmen • Ideas and Options in English for Specific Purposes
Kumaravadivelu • Understanding Language Teaching: From Method to
Postmethod
McKay • Researching Second Language Classrooms
Egbert/Petrie, Eds. • CALL Research Perspectives
Canagarajah, Ed. • Reclaiming the Local in Language Policy and Practice
Adamson • Language Minority Students in American Schools:
An Education in English
Fotos/Browne, Eds. • New Perspectives on CALL for Second Language
Classrooms
Hinkel • Teaching Academic ESL Writing: Practical Techniques in
Vocabulary and Grammar
Hinkel/Fotos, Eds. • New Perspectives on Grammar Teaching in Second
Language Classrooms
Birch • English L2 Reading: Getting to the Bottom
Hinkel • Second Language Writers’ Text: Linguistic and Rhetorical
Features

Ideas and Options
in
English for Specific Purposes

Helen Basturkmen
The University of Auckland

2006

L AW R E NC E E R L B AU M A S S O C I AT E S , PU BL I S HERS
Mahwah, New Jersey
London

This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2008.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
Copyright © 2006 by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form, by
photostat, microform, retrieval system, or any other means, without prior written
permission of the publisher.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., Publishers
10 Industrial Avenue
Mahwah, New Jersey 07430
www.erlbaum.com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Basturkmen, Helen.
Ideas and options in English for specific purposes / Helen Basturkmen
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0–8058–4417–1 — ISBN 0–8058–4418–X (pbk.)
1. English language — Study and teaching (Higher) — Foreign
speakers. 2. English language — Business English — Study and teaching
(Higher) 3. English language — Technical English — Study and teaching
(Higher) I. Title.
PE1128.A2.B317 2005
428'.0071 — dc22
2005047285
ISBN 1-4106-1704-1 Master e-book ISBN

Contents

Preface

ix

Part I: Preliminaries
1 Introduction
Aims and Audience
Impetuses 4
Influences 6

3
3

2 Approach

9

Data-Driven 9
Structuration Theory 10
Framework for Analysis 12

3 Issues in ESP Course Design

15

Varieties of Language 15
Needs Analysis 17
Types of Syllabuses 20
Narrow- and Wide-Angled Course Designs 25
Specific and Specifiable Elements in ESP 26
Summary 28
Questions for Discussion and Projects 29
Further Reading 29

Part II: Ideas and Options
S e c t ion A : L a nguage
4 Language Systems

35

Grammatical Structures and Core Vocabulary 35
Patterns of Text Organization 38
Summary 44
Questions for Discussion and Projects 44
Further Reading 45
v

vi

con t en ts

5 Language Uses
Speech Acts 47
Genres 51
Social Interaction 61
Words Used for Discipline-Specific Meanings
Summary 67
Questions for Discussion and Projects 67
Further Reading 70

47

63

6 Combining Language Descriptions

73

In-House Teaching Material for Engineering Students 73
An Academic Speaking Course 78
Research Study Into Workplace Language 78
Summary 80
Questions for Discussion and Projects 81
Further Reading 81

S e c t ion B : L e a r n i ng
7 Conditions for Learning

85

Acculturation 85
Input and Interaction 90
Summary 94
Questions for Discussion and Projects 94
Further Reading 96

8 Processes of Learning

97

Information Processing 97
Learning Through Content 101
Activity Theory—An Ecological Perspective 105
Summary 107
Questions for Discussion and Projects 108
Further Reading 108

S e c t ion C : Te ac h i ng
9 Methodologies

113

Input-Based Strategies 114
Output-Based Strategies 123
Summary 131
Questions for Discussion and Projects 131
Further Reading 132

10 Objectives in Teaching ESP
To Reveal Subject-Specific Language Use 134
To Develop Target Performance Competencies 135

133

con t en ts

vii

To Teach Underlying Knowledge 137
To Develop Strategic Competence 138
To Foster Critical Awareness 140
Summary 144
Questions for Discussion and Projects 145
Further Reading 146

Part III: General
11 Synthesis

149

Reintroducing the Framework 149
Using the Framework 151
Summary 157
Questions for Discussion and Projects 159
Further Reading 165

References
Author Index
Subject Index

167
179
183

This page intentionally left blank

Preface

This is a book about different approaches to English for Specific Purposes
(ESP). Much of the literature in ESP to date has focused on case-by-case
descriptions of individual teaching or research projects. It has also focused
on practical aspects, such as course and materials design (Dudley-Evans &
St. John, 1998). The purpose of this book is to go beyond individual cases
and practices to examine the approaches and the ideas on which they are
based. The book does not seek to promote any one approach but to identify and illustrate the approaches in evidence today. The work addresses
questions such as: What types of ESP teaching are practiced? What are the
alternatives in ESP course design and what ideas about language and learning are they based on? What different roles can ESP teaching play? What
kinds of research are carried out into the communicative practices of professional, academic, and workplace groups? How are theories from second
language acquisition (SLA) reflected in ESP? What links are there between
the emergence of a sociopolitical awareness in education and ESP?
This book is primarily geared toward the interests of participants on
graduate-level TESOL teacher education courses. It serves as a basis for
examination of theories and the links between them and practice and
research in ESP. It aims to encourage readers to adopt an analytical stance
toward the field, to identify the approaches in ESP today and the ideas
driving them.
This is a book about ideas—the different views of language, learning,
and teaching in ESP. However, it is not a book about ideas in the abstract.
The main emphasis of the book is on the links between theory and ESP
teaching and research. Ideas from linguistics, sociolinguistics, education,
SLA, and social theories are described. Links are then made between them
and ESP course designs, instructional materials, and research projects.
Thus the work moves back and forth between description of theories, teaching practice, and research.
ESP is taught in many different countries and contexts. Recognizing
this, the book draws on a wide range of examples of teaching practice
and research from around the world and from different branches of ESP,
ix

x

pr e face

including English for Academic Purposes (EAP), English for Professional
Purposes (EPP), and English for Vocational Purposes (EVP).

OV E RV I E W
The book has three parts. Part I introduces the book’s approach to description of ESP and the framework used to investigate ESP. Chapter 1 identifies
gaps in the current literature on ESP. Chapter 2 outlines the approach to
description of ESP used in the book. Chapter 3 examines general issues in
ESP course design.
Part II examines ideas of language, learning, and teaching in ESP. Chapters 4 and 5 are concerned with the types of language descriptions used in
ESP. Chapter 4 examines descriptions of language systems and chapter 5
examines descriptions of language use. Chapter 6 illustrates ESP course
and research designs that combine different descriptions. Chapters 7 and
8 examine ideas of learning in relation to ESP. Chapter 7 explores ideas
about conditions needed for learning and chapter 8 explores ideas about
how learning occurs in ESP in relation to the literature on second language
acquisition. Chapters 9 and 10 discuss teaching. Chapter 9 examines options in ESP methodology. Chapter 10 investigates ESP teaching objectives.
Recent years have seen a growing awareness of the sociopolitical implications of ESP teaching. Criticisms have been voiced that ESP is often a force
for accommodation rather than change, and calls have been made for a
critical ESP (Benesch, 2001). Chapter 10 explores conventional and emerging ideas about the objectives of ESP teaching. In Part III, chapter 11 brings
together the ideas examined in the preceding chapters and demonstrates
how they can be used together to analyse and compare ESP teaching projects. In the chapters, content is organized around three themes: Concepts,
Research, and Applications.
From chapter 3 on, each chapter includes a section entitled “Questions
for Discussion and Projects” or “Questions for Discussion.” These sections
have been included to encourage readers to research and analyse the
practices of ESP around them and to consider the ideas they draw on in
their own teaching. References are given at the end of the chapters for readers wishing to read more on the topics covered and to provide additional
resources to help with the questions for discussion and projects.

AC K NOW L E DGM E N T S
I would like to thank series editor Eli Hinkel for her care and guidance in
the preparation of this book. Her advice and suggestions have contributed

pr e face

xi

enormously to the outcome of the work and any merits it may have. I wish to
thank Naomi Silverman and the members of her editorial team at Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates for their patience and help in the preparation of this
book for publication. My gratitude goes to Rod Ellis, who encouraged
me to write a book on ESP and for feedback in the initial stages. Finally, I
would like to acknowledge all my colleagues in the Department of Applied
Language Studies and Linguistics at the University of Auckland for their
generous support.

This page intentionally left blank

I
PREL IMIN A RIE S

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter

1

Introduction

This chapter argues that a book surveying ideas and options in ESP is a
useful addition to the existing literature. To this end, a case is made that
there are certain gaps in the ESP literature at present that the work aims to
address and that it is timely to survey the range of ideas and options in ESP
given the calls now being made for ESP to adopt a critical approach. The
chapter also sets out the sources that influenced the present work.

A I M S A N D AU DI E NC E
This book has two aims. First, it aims to offer an examination of ideas influencing recent and present practice in ESP teaching and research. Second,
it aims to illustrate the range of options that exist in ESP at present.
Teachers have at their disposal a range of options in designing ESP
courses and materials. For example, two options in ESP in evidence today
are genre-based approaches to course design and deep-end classroom
methodology.
Genre-based approaches focus learners’ attention on text types, or
genres, that occur in target discourse communities, that is, the work- or
study-related groups the learners aim to enter or make progress in as a
result of gains in their English language proficiency. In an academic discourse community, significant genres are typically term papers, small-scale
research projects, seminars, and research reports. Members of discourse
communities regularly communicate with one another and with the outside
world. By doing so, they have developed specific communicative practices
and mechanisms, that is, distinctive forms of discourse. It is understood that
learners of English should try to emulate the ways of communicating of those
who are already members of those communities, and thus ESP instruction
focuses learners’ attention on the genres used in target discourse communities, as these are seen to represent the typical forms of communication in
3

4

CHAPTER 1

them. ESP teachers lead learners in the analysis of sample texts to identify
conventional formats and the collective mind-set for communication of the
members of the communities they aspire to. Research and teaching based
on analysis of genres in academic communities are described in Swales
(1990) and on analysis of genres in professional settings in Bhatia (1993).
Some classroom methodologies make extensive use of simulations, such
as case studies from law or business. Students are asked to perform the simulation from the outset with either no or minimal input from the teacher.
This is termed deep-end strategy (Dudley-Evans & St. John, 1998, p. 190).
Learners are cast into a situation where they need to use English in order
to perform, a situation in which they have to communicate using whatever
English they have at their disposal. In this way, teachers and learners can
find out in what ways the learners’ knowledge of English is sufficient for the
task and in what ways it fails them. Instruction can then focus on the aspects
of language that were problematic for the learners.
Each of these two options incorporates different ideas about language
learning. The aim of this book is to present the various options seen in
ESP at present (such as genre-based approaches and deep-end methodology) and to examine the ideas distinguishing them. This examination of
theoretical ideas and the links between them and practice and research will
be of particular use to students on teacher education programs. It will also
be of interest to the growing numbers of teachers working in the field of
ESP to serve as a basis for situating their own practices and approaches and
surveying the field in which they work.

I M PET USE S
Why a book on ideas and options in ESP? There are two main impetuses
behind this work. One comes from the gap in the literature on ESP. The
field of EAP is surveyed in Jordan (1997) and of ESP in Dudley-Evans &
St. John (1998). The surveys cover a wide range of topics but do not deal
with theory and ideas in detail. The literature has tended to focus primarily
on practical issues, a point noted by Dudley-Evans & St. John (1998): ‘It is
interesting and significant that so much of the writing has concentrated on
the procedures of ESP and on relating course design to learners’ specific
needs rather than on theoretical matters’ (p. 1).
Where there has been discussion of ideas in the literature, this discussion
has mostly focused on which descriptions of language can best inform ESP.
Different approaches to language description in ESP have emerged over the
years. One early approach was based on counting the frequency of linguistic
forms in a given register. Barber (1962/1985) identified the frequency of a
number of syntactic forms in written scientific prose by analysis of a corpus

I N T RO DUC T IO N

5

of texts from a mixture of scientific disciplines (electronics, biochemistry,
and astronomy) and genres. The approach was later critiqued for failing to
identify the purposes for which the forms were used. Subsequent analyses
(for example, Tarone, Dwyer, Gillette, & Icke’s 1981 study of passives in
astrophysics) aimed to identify both linguistic forms and the purposes for
which they were used (Flowerdew & Peacock, 2001b). The history of ESP’s
adoption of such approaches has been a recurrent focus of interest in the
literature. It is reported in Robinson (1991), Dudley-Evans and St. John
(1998), and Flowerdew and Peacock (2001b).
Discussion of ideas of learning languages for specific purposes has been
limited. Although reports of methodologies have been featured in the literature, connections between them and underlying views of learning have
rarely been made (although a notable exception is Hutchinson & Waters,
1987). Swales’ seminal work, Episodes in ESP (1985), reflects the preoccupations of ESP with practical aspects of course and materials design and with
language descriptions. Approximately half the articles in this work address
each of these two areas. One article in this work, ‘Box Kites,’ contains an
interesting proposal for course and materials design—an example of a
task-based project for engineering students at Kuwait University. Although
the views of learning implicit in project work and task-based learning are
worth exploring, there is little discussion of them.
Generally, ESP has not been much concerned with the debates and
issues emerging in recent years in the field of second language acquisition
(Dudley-Evans & St. John, 1998; Bloor, 1998). Published reports of research
focusing on language acquisition in ESP have been limited. One exception is the study of interlanguage use in relation to discourse domains by
Selinker and Douglas (1985). It has also been noted that few studies have
set out to investigate the effectiveness of ESP courses (Dudley-Evans & St.
John, 1998).
There is also limited discussion in the literature about the objectives of
ESP teaching. In the early years of ESP, the objective was seen in terms of
imparting linguistic knowledge with ESP functioning to reveal the facts
about the linguistic features of subject-specific language (Swales, 1985).
Later it was seen in terms of training students in communicative repertoires
characteristic of target situations (Munby, 1978). More recently, proposals
include the notion that ESP should teach students concepts from their
discipline, as well as language, in order to develop their ‘underlying competence’ (Hutchinson & Waters, 1985). Beyond this, however, exploration
of the objectives of ESP teaching has been limited. This book aims to work
toward addressing these gaps. It sets out to examine ideas about learning
and teaching as well as ideas about language in ESP.
A second impetus for this work comes from the attempts in ESP to reconcile its work with the critical orientation emerging in applied linguistics

6

CHAPTER 1

at present. Critical Applied Linguistics has as its goal analysis of the ways
people are unfairly positioned socially, culturally, economically, and politically (Pennycook, 1997a). A number of writers have articulated concerns
about the role of ESP in society. Ideological worries are surfacing and calls
are being made for critical ESP. Master (1998) argues that inasmuch as
English dominates today’s world and is the established lingua franca of
science, technology, and business, ESP ‘holds a pivotal position in regard
to the use or abuse of this power’ (p. 716). In relation to the experience
of teaching English for academic and scientific purposes in developing
countries, Swales (1998) comments:
I have belatedly come to recognize a certain self deception. . . . I believed working overseas in scientific English, as researcher, materials writer, and teacher,
was, in essence, a culturally and politically neutral enterprise. In doing so, I
conveniently overlooked the links between teaching technical languages and
the manufacture and export of technical equipment. (p. 5)

Typically, ESP has functioned to help language learners cope with the
features of language or to develop the competencies needed to function
in a discipline, profession, or workplace. But does this mean that ESP has
been a force for accommodation and that by helping learners fit into target
discourse communities it has served the interests of the members of those
communities? Has it served the interests of linguistically privileged ingroups? Benesch (1996, 2001) calls for a critical approach to EAP teaching
and shows how teachers can lead learners to question and challenge the
status quo. Given the growing concern about the social and political implications of ESP teaching and the emergence of critical approaches in recent
years, it is timely to stand back from current practices in ESP teaching and
to consider the ideas and theories behind them.

I N F LU E NC E S
The approach used to examine ESP in this book has been influenced by
two main sources. First, this book owes a considerable debt to previous
work in the area of analysis of ideas and options in language teaching by
Stern (1983, 1989, 1992). Stern proposes a framework for analysis of language teaching comprising three lines of inquiry: the idea of language, of
language learning, and the function of language teaching. Following Stern,
this book sets out to examine the following in ESP practice and research:
1. Ideas about language and the types of language descriptions drawn
on.

I N T RO DUC T IO N

7

2. Ideas about language learning and how they can be related to the
literature on second language acquisition.
3. Ideas about teaching methodologies and objectives.
The work is also influenced by a social theory, Structuration Theory (Giddens, 1984). This theory is based on the idea that social groups are constituted and continually reproduced through recurrent practices. These
practices are mutually understood and generally exist as taken-for-granted
forms of behaviour. Although the understanding of these practices is most
often tacit, knowledge about these practices can be reported also (Blaikie,
1995). In this theory, the goal of the social enquiry is to establish the
mutual knowledge of the community, and the means to establishing this is
through analysis of their recurrent practices. The world of ESP can be seen
as a social group. It is constituted and reproduced through a number of
conventionalised and recurring practices visible in course designs and classroom materials, as well as an established body of knowledge and literature
reported as teaching and research projects in journal articles and in books.
The task of this book is to analyse and illuminate the ‘mutual knowledge’
of this society—that is, to reveal the practices of the world of ESP teaching
through examination of academic writing and research as well as ESP
course designs and methodologies.
A detailed discussion of the elements contributing to the formulation of
the approach used in this book can be found in chapter 2. The framework
used to examine ESP in the book is presented in chapter 2, also.

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter

2

Approach

Whereas General English Language teaching tends to set out from point
A toward an often pretty indeterminate destination, setting sail through
largely uncharted waters, ESP aims to speed learners through to a known
destination. The emphasis in ESP on going from A to B in the most
time- and energy-efficient manner can lead to the view that ESP is an essentially practical endeavor. Nevertheless, within ESP there are proposals
and counterproposals, arguments and counterarguments about the nature
of the destination (views of what is meant by knowing a language for special
purposes) and the best way of getting there (views of learning and teaching). Thus, although practical in orientation, ESP, like any other language
teaching enterprise, is based on ideas about the nature of language, learning, and teaching. The task of this chapter is to set forth the approach to
examination of these ideas used in this book.
This chapter introduces three key elements of the approach used to
examine ESP in this book. These are: (a) the (mainly) data-driven nature
of the enquiry; (b) the reference to a social theory—Structuration Theory
(Giddens, 1984), which, it is argued, offers a useful perspective for ESP;
and (c) the framework by which ideas in ESP are examined and the work
organized.

DATA - DR I V E N
The approach taken in this book is essentially data-driven. This is because
ESP practice has marched ahead of discussion of ideas. It is, however, time
to stand back from practice and make explicit the thinking behind it. Beaugrande (1997) draws attention to the fact that in many domains of human
activity, practices are established before explanations are provided. A datadriven approach is inductive and aims to provide explanations of already
occurring events. This book sets out to examine the practice of ESP. The
9

10

CHAPTER 2

aim is to examine examples of ESP courses, materials, and research projects
and discuss the ideas of language, learning, or teaching they encapsulate.

ST RUC T U R AT ION T H EORY
In recent years, the approach to language description for English for
Academic Purposes developed by Swales (1990) has been embraced by ESP.
This approach has an evolving theory of language use in discourse communities, such as specific academic or professional groups, and views language
as genres characterized by communicative purpose and distinct patterns
of moves in them. The key linguistic unit in this approach is genre —a type
of communicative event, identifiable by its communicative purposes and
recognized as such by the members of the discourse community that use
it. Through the targeting of genres in specific discourse communities, ESP
has tried to provide valid language description for learners. Originally, the
focus of genre-based approaches to ESP was tied to the analysis of text types.
More recently, ESP has adopted a more dynamic view of genres, seeing
them as “subject to change and adaptation, by the participants, in contrast
to the somewhat static original text-bound conceptualization” (Flowerdew
& Peacock, 2001b, p. 16). There has been increasing research interest in
ethnographic approaches to the description of genres. This entails moving
beyond purely language-based description to description of the context of
use as well. This focus on how genres emerge and develop demands a vision
not just of language and texts but also of society and how it functions. In
short, it needs to be related to a social theory.
One major social theory informing the genre approach of Swales is
Structuration Theory (Giddens, 1984). This is a theory of action and, like a
number of other such social theories, addresses the question of how it is that
“all competent members of society are able to act, interact, and understand
the meaning of what they do” (Cohen, 1996, p. 211). Theories of action can
be differentiated into two subcategories: those that argue the significance
of subjective consciousness in action, and those that argue the importance
of social conduct (praxis). The former assert the primacy of mental acts in
directing action. The latter assert that social processes rather than mental
acts are most influential; and the human mind does not have unrestricted
powers to direct human action (Cohen, 1996). Giddens’ structuration account of the constitution of society is an example of the latter.
Structuration theory addresses the subject of enduring practices in social
life and argues that the things that happen or exist in social life are produced
through enacted forms of conduct. According to Giddens (1984), societies
(society at large as well as subsocieties within it such as ethnicities, genders,
and, in our case, academic, professional, and workplace communities) are

A P P ROAC H

11

constituted and continually reproduced through recurring and largely
taken-for-granted forms of behaviour such as genres. These forms of behaviour or social practices emerge, develop, and eventually die away over time
in relation to the needs of the members of the society as they deal with the
practical aspects of their day-to-day existence. This social theory is rooted
in the interpretive paradigm and based on abductive approach (Blaikie,
1995). Social life is construed as a routine and a skilled performance. This
is described by Blaikie (1995):
Social life is a skilled performance which is made possible because competent
members of society are practical social theorists who modify their theories
about practical aspects of daily life on the basis of their experiences. The
mutual knowledge which social actors use to negotiate their encounters with
others and make sense of social activity is regarded as the fundamental matter
of social science. The social scientist cannot begin to describe any social activity without knowing what social actors know, either what they report or tacitly
assume, while engaging in the social activity. (p. 188)

Members of societies need to know the ‘rules of the game’—they need to
know how to produce acceptable forms of communication and action.
A player in a game knows a particular rule for the game, when he knows how
to play according to that rule, when he knows how to go on . . . to know the
rule is to know then what one is supposed to do in all situations to which that
rule applies. . . . A person may grasp a rule through observing regularity in
what people do. (Giddens, 1979, p. 133)

According to Giddens (1984), members of a society have two types of
knowledge. They have practical consciousness, tacit understanding of conventionalized procedures. They also have discursive consciousness. They can put
into words these skills and procedures they have mastered and construct
their own theories from their experiences. However, it is only during critical
periods when routines break down that this kind of consciousness surfaces
(Cohen, 1996). The analyst aims to establish the mutual knowledge of the
society. This is done by illuminating practical consciousness and inferring
the conventionalized procedures rather than listening to the members’
views as to what the procedures are and taking this as fact (Blaikie, 1995).
Structuration theory is used here in two ways. Firstly, the theory can be
used to explain a genre-based approach to teaching ESP. ESP is concerned
with preparing students to enter target discourse communities (academic,
professional, and workplace) with distinct and evolving communicative
practices. Our ESP students can be seen as would-be participants in discourse communities. To participate, they need to become skilled performers. Genres and discourse generally are taken-for-granted forms of conduct
by which the target academic, professional, and workplace communities are

12

CHAPTER 2

constituted. ESP learners, in order to participate in the societies they aspire
to, need to know the rules of the game regarding these genres. To become
skilled performers, they must be introduced to the rules of the game and
thus the task of ESP can be seen as researching and teaching these rules. If
ESP teachers and researchers can provide valid descriptions of skilled performance and ESP learners can acquire the elements of this performance,
they can join the subculture and become part of the production of that
society. Structuration theory and the concept of genres as taken-for-granted
forms of behavior that are constituted and reproduced by a discourse community are discussed in some detail in chapter 5.
Second, structuration theory offers a useful perspective for the analysis
of options and ideas in ESP in this book. The world of ESP can be construed
as an established community, with its own evolving and taken-for-granted
forms of conduct that are constituted in recurrent teaching practices,
methodologies, and research interests. This book attempts to explicate
the ideas behind these forms of conduct and shed light on the practical
consciousness of the ESP teaching community.

F R A M E WOR K FOR A NA LYSI S
The framework used in the present work to examine ESP is heavily influenced by two frameworks developed for examining general English
language teaching, those of Stern (1983, 1992) and Richards and Rodgers
(1986).
Stern (1983, 1992) proposed a general conceptual framework for language teaching that comprised four key concepts: language, learning,
teaching, and context. These were argued to be the basic building blocks of
language teaching. Stern recognized that these concepts are often implicit
in acts of teaching or in policy decisions practice, rather than explicitly
stated. Stern argued that in order to compare and contrast different teaching practices, the concepts of language, learning, teaching, and society that
underpinned those practices needed to be identified.
Stern argued that language teaching requires, first, a concept of the nature of language. How language is treated in the curriculum varies according
to the fundamental beliefs held. For example, it may be treated analytically
or synthetically. Language may be treated mainly as a set of grammatical
constructions or discourse structures or sounds. Sociolinguistic aspects
of language use, such as appropriateness, may or may not be attended to.
Language teaching involves, second, a view of the learner and the nature of
language learning. Third, it involves a view of language teaching specifying
the role given to the teacher and a description of teaching. Last, it involves
a view of the context of teaching.

13

A P P ROAC H

FIG. 2.1. Framework for analysis of ideas and options in ESP.

Richards and Rodgers (1986) discuss approaches in language teaching.
They identify the two main components of an approach: (a) a theory of
the nature of language (an account of the nature of language proficiency
and an account of the basic units of language structure), and (b) a theory
of the nature of language learning (an account of the psycholinguistic and
cognitive processes involved in language learning and an account of the
conditions that allow for the successful use of these processes).
The remainder of this section sets out the Framework for Analysing ESP
used to examine ideas and options in this work. The framework is intended
to serve a number of purposes:
• To provide the categories with which different ESP teaching operations can be interpreted in fairly general terms.

14

CHAPTER 2

• To help ESP teachers define their own ideas and perspectives on ESP
teaching, and locate their own version of ESP.
• To enable ESP teachers and other professionals in the field to identify
their position in regard to the various issues and options in the field, for example, where they position their own work in terms of the type of language
description or view of the processes of learning in ESP it is based on.
• To enable ESP teachers to analyze and interpret documentary evidence of ESP, such as policy statements, education department initiatives,
school mission statements, textbooks, methodological prescriptions, and
curriculum statements.
Figure 2.1 shows that this work is organized into three areas: ideas about
language, learning, and teaching ESP. In each area two different types of
descriptions or explanations are given.

Chapter

3

Issues in ESP Course Design

This chapter examines issues related to four topics in ESP course design.
It examines first the topic of language varieties, that is, descriptions of language use in specific academic, workplace, or professional environments.
Second, it examines the topic of needs analysis, the type of investigation
ESP curriculum developers use to identify the gap between what learners
already know and what they need to know in order to study or work in
their specific target environments. Curriculum developers use findings
from needs analyses to help them specify the content of syllabuses. Third,
it examines the topic of the syllabus. A number of different types of syllabus have been identified in the literature. Finally, it examines the topic
of wide- versus narrow-angled course designs. Narrow-angled courses are
devised for learners with very similar needs and are highly specialized.
Wide-angled ESP courses are devised for learners with needs that are only
somewhat similar and less specialized. The chapter concludes with discussion of specific and specifiable aspects of ESP.
VA R I ET I E S OF L A NGUAGE
The term variety refers to registers of language use, such as English in
banking, English in medicine, English in academic settings, and everyday
conversation. According to Bloor and Bloor (1986), there are two perspectives on the term language for specific purposes. One is that a specific-purpose
language is based on and extends from a basic core of general language (the
common core plus). The second is that all language exists as one variety or
another and that there is no basic core (‘general-purpose’) language.
The Common Core Plus
It can be argued that there is a common core of general language that is
drawn on in all areas of life and work. This can also be referred to as ‘basic’
15

16

CHAPTER 3

language. Figure 3.1 shows a representation of common core language and
its relationship to language varieties (Pitt Corder, 1993).
The inner section represents basic language and includes common words
and sentence structures that can be used in all situations. The common core
is represented as a general pool of language of high frequency items that
predominates all uses of languages. Pitt Corder (1993) described this view
as an abstraction. He argued:
The utility of such a notion is rather doubtful. If, for example, a learner wishes
to converse with lawyers in a foreign language, then those items which are
part of legal language are central to his needs; many of them, however, have
very low ‘relative frequency’ in ‘the language as a whole.’ (p. 66–67)

The idea that different varieties of English are based on a common set
of grammatical and other linguistic characteristics has been widespread
(Bloor & Bloor, 1986). The idea is reflected in the following quotation from
Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartik (1972), who argued that learners
need to come to grips with basic English before they study English for
specific purposes:

FIG. 3.1. Common core view. From Introduction to Applied
Linguistics (p. 66) by S. Pit Corder, 1993, Harmondsworth:
Penguin. Copyright © 1973 by S. Pit Corder. Reprinted
with permission.

I S S U E S I N E S P C OU R S E D E S I G N

17

Attempts to teach a ‘restricted’ language (‘English for Engineers’) too often
ignore the danger in so doing of trying to climb a ladder which is sinking in
the mud; it is no use trying to approach a point on the upper rungs if there is
no foundation. (p. 29)

Coxhead and Nation (2001) categorize vocabulary for teaching and
learning into four groups of words: high frequency words, academic vocabulary, technical vocabulary, and low frequency vocabulary. They argue:
‘When learners have mastered control of the 2,000 words of general usefulness in English, it is wise to direct vocabulary learning to more specialized
areas depending on the aims of the learners’ (pp. 252–253).
All Language is Specific Purpose
A second perspective is that there is no common core of language preexisting to varieties. The core is, rather, an essential part of any one of the innumerable varieties of the language (Bloor & Bloor, 1986). In short, ‘basic’
language is what is present in all varieties of English, where the varieties
overlap. All languages are learned in some context or another. There is
thus no ‘basic’ variety-less English, there is no ‘general English’ or English
for no specific purposes. All English exists as some variety or another. Bloor
and Bloor (1986) assert:
All language learning is acquired from one variety or another, even if it is
‘classroom English’ variety. A language learner is as likely to acquire ‘the
language’ from one variety as from another, but the use of language, being
geared to situation and participants, is learned in appropriate contexts. This
view supports a theory of language use as the basis of language acquisition
theory. (p. 28)

According to Bloor and Bloor (1986), teaching a specific variety of
English (ESP) can start at any level including beginners. Moreover, learning from the specific variety of English (for example, English for doctors,
English for hospitality), is highly effective as learners acquire structures in
relation to the range of meanings in which they are used in their academic,
workplace, or professional environments. Figure 3.2 represents this second
perspective. The figure shows three varieties of English (V1, V2, and V3).

N E E DS A NA LYSI S
ESP is understood to be about preparing learners to use English within
academic, professional, or workplace environments, and a key feature of
ESP course design is that the syllabus is based on an analysis of the needs

18

CHAPTER 3

FIG. 3.2. Language varieties view. From Languages for
Specific Purposes (p. 20), by M. Bloor and T. Bloor, 1986.
Reprinted by permission of Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.

of the students. Thus, in ESP, language is learnt not for its own sake or for
the sake of gaining a general education but to smooth the path to entry or
greater linguistic efficiency in these environments. As the syllabus is based
on needs, it is likely to be motivating for learners, who see the obvious
relevance of what they are studying. Moreover, most ESP courses are subject
to time constraints and time must be effectively utilized (West, 1994). As
students in ESP classes often have restricted time to learn English, it makes
sense to teach them only the bits of English they need. Thus the task of the
ESP course developer is to identify the needs of the learner and design a
course around them.
A number of needs analysis studies are reported in the ESP literature.
Chia, Johnson, Chia, and Olive (1999) report their investigation of the
English language needs of medical students in Taiwan. Sakr (2001) reports
a study into the English language needs of textile and clothing industry
workers in Cairo, and Evangelou (1994) reports a project to explore the
English language needs of nurses.
Needs analysis studies have investigated the perceptions of language
needs of different parties and have often revealed differing perceptions.
Ferris (1998) investigated the differing perceptions of students and faculty
of students’ academic aural/oral needs for university study in number of
colleges in the United States. Basturkmen (1998a) investigated student and
faculty perceptions of the English language needs of students in the Faculty

I S S U E S I N E S P C OU R S E D E S I G N

19

of Engineering and Petroleum at Kuwait University. Jasso-Aguilar (1999)
investigated the perspectives of maids and the institutional representatives
of the hotel in Waikiki in which the maids worked.
Li So-mui and Mead (2000) report the needs analysis they conducted
to help them prepare an ESP course for students of textile and clothing
merchandising in Hong Kong. Their project set out to obtain information
on the types of communication required in the industry. They used a
range of research methods to collect data including questionnaire surveys,
telephone interviews, analysis of authentic correspondence, and visits to the
workplaces of the merchandisers. The study revealed that the merchandisers used written English far more than spoken English in their work; that
fax and telephone calls were more common channels of communication
than e-mails and letters, and that there was a high use of abbreviations in
written communication.
Some needs analyses follow ethnographic principles and aim for a ‘thick
description’ of the target environments (Johns & Dudley-Evans, 1991). This
approach to needs analysis involves in-depth ethnographic data collection
methods such as observations and exploratory interviews. Examples of this
type of needs analysis are Jasso-Aguilar’s study (1999) of the language needs
of maids in a hotel in Waikiki, Ibrahim’s study (1993) of language needs
in the manufacturing industry in Japan, and Kurtoglu’s study (1992) of
seminar speaking needs in a Turkish university.
Needs analysis in ESP has been critiqued and a number of issues identified in this seemingly neutral enterprise. Some of the criticisms and
issues are:
• The information too often comes from the institutions themselves,
who already have definite expectations about what the students should be
able to do, and thus needs analysis serves the interests of the institutions,
often at the expense of the learners (Auerbach, 1995).
• Language training for specific purposes can be a covert means to channel immigrants into marginal occupations, ensuring that they only have
sufficient English to perform specific low-wage jobs and do not have good
enough English to be able to move out of these jobs (Tollefson, 1991).
• The learners are often asked for their perceptions of needs but they
may not be reliable sources of information about their own needs, especially
if they are relatively unfamiliar with the job they are to perform or subject
they are to study (Long, 1996).
• Objective needs are not necessarily the same as subjective needs or
wants. For example, engineering students may objectively need to deal with
written texts concerned with technical matter but may want to read topics
in English on other general interest subjects. Using technical texts, topics,
or tasks may turn out to be demotivating.

20

CHAPTER 3

• Language needs are not learning needs. Although learners will need
to use certain language structures or features in their target environments,
this does not mean that they are ready to acquire them (Hutchinson &
Waters, 1987).
• Asking learners about their language needs can be problematic because they may lack awareness or metalanguage to describe these needs
in any meaningful way. It is improbable that students with unsophisticated
knowledge about language would make sound decisions about their needs
(Chambers, 1980).
• Language use in specific situations is simply too unpredictable to be
identified in any certain terms. ESP has sometimes produced a rigid view of
language needs and failed to take account of the variation of language use
that exists in any target situation. A striking example of a rigid approach
to analysis of language needs is seen in Munby’s Communicative Needs
Processor (1978). This approach involved the attempt to identify not only
the English language functions that would be needed (for example, by a
waiter working in a Spanish tourist resort) but also the actual linguistic
formula for realising these functions.
• Perspectives of needs vary and the needs analyst has to decide whose
perspectives to take into account in designing ESP courses or synthesize
divergent perspectives (Jasso-Aguilar, 1999).
• Basing course designs on needs analysis may lead to language training
rather than language education. Learners are trained to perform a restricted repertoire of the language rather than develop underlying linguistic competence of the language because they are deprived of the generative
basis of language (Widdowson, 1983).
• Needs analysis is a means of fitting outsiders into the communicative
practices of linguistically privileged in-groups. Needs analysis purports to be
a neutral enterprise but in fact is often used by institutions to get others to
conform to established communicative practices (Benesch, 2001).
• Needs analyses are not theoretically neutral. It can be argued that “any
system of needs analysis is related to the theory of the nature of language”
(West, 1994, p. 2). One needs analyst may aim to identify the language
functions used in a particular environment whereas another may aim to
identify high frequency syntactic features or lexical items occurring in the
same environment.

T Y PE S OF S Y L L A BUSE S
One of the fundamental questions for language teaching is what language
is to be taught. In order to specify what language will be taught, items are

I S S U E S I N E S P C OU R S E D E S I G N

21

FIG. 3.3. Characteristics of a syllabus (from A Course in Language Teaching,
by P. Ur, © 1996, Cambridge University Press, p. 177).

typically listed and referred to as the syllabus. Figure 3.3 shows a fairly
standard view of the syllabus. Graves (1996) discusses the language curriculum and syllabus. She describes the curriculum as a broad statement
of the philosophy, purposes, design, and implementation of the entire
language teaching program and the syllabus as a specification and ordering
of content of a course.
The seemingly straightforward procedure of specifying and ordering
content involves, however, embracing one or more of a number of theoretical stances. In this respect, syllabus is aligned to the overall ‘philosophy’ of
the course or courses. The ‘items’ or units teachers and course developers
specify as course content and how they organize them reveal their ideas of
the nature of language and learning. If they construe language as a set of
communicative purposes, they would probably list various pragmatic functions (speech acts) of language (such as request, report, and describe) as
course content.
Syllabuses can be synthetic (language is segmented into discrete linguistic items for presentation one at a time) or analytic (language is presented
whole chunks at a time without linguistic control; Long & Crookes, 1992).
Designers of analytic syllabuses believe the language content for a course
should not be prespecified because language cannot be atomized into

22

CHAPTER 3

discrete particles for ‘learning.’ Rather, language should be approached
holistically and teaching should proceed from the whole to the parts (Freeman & Freeman, 1989). Those who embrace the view that learning occurs
when learners acquire individual items of language one by one and later
combine them might opt for a synthetic syllabus that lists the linguistic
items to be learnt. Those who embrace a view that learning occurs when
learners perceive patterns in language samples and induce rules from
them might opt for an analytic syllabus and list items that do refer not to
language units but to some other sort of unit, such as task, situation, or
topic.
When teachers and course designers opt for a synthetic approach and list
items for the syllabus, the type of items listed reveals their ideas about what
is important in two ways:
1. The types of items listed reveals ideas about the basic units of language and understanding of what ‘packages’ language naturally comes in.
Is language best seen as the expression of intended actions of individual
users (speech acts) or as patterns of language use that emerge in group
practices over time (genres)? Does language come in sentences or texts?
2. The selection of items included reveals ideas about what is important. We may list pragmatic functions indicating a view of language as the
intended actions of individual users (speech acts). However, as the number
of possible pragmatic functions is very long, we need to select the pragmatic
functions we see as the most important. We may feel that knowing how to
request factual information and responding to requests to it are essential
elements and thus include them in our list. This might indicate our orientation to an idea that language for specific purposes is concerned first and
foremost with conveying factual information—the referential function of
language. We may think that offering condolences or eliciting sympathy
are somehow less essential and not include them, indicating a view that
language for specific purposes is not about social purposes.
The academic, workplace and professional environment to which ESP
students are headed may be little different from other environments in
regard to the importance of social intercourse. It has been taken for
granted that ESP teaching should focus on ‘hard’ language functions rather
than ‘soft’ social functions. Halliday (1973) uses the terms the referential
and instrumental functions of language. The first refers to language used
to convey facts and knowledge; the second refers to language used to get
things done. It has been assumed that social functions are less important
than referential or instrumental functions in teaching ESP. However, recent
applied linguistic research investigated the social functions language is used

I S S U E S I N E S P C OU R S E D E S I G N

23

for in workplace environments and showed their importance (Holmes,
1999). Holmes (1998) reports on a study of the function of humor in the
workplace. A study by Linde (1988) found that pilots’ use of mitigation (politeness formula to soften the force of utterances) correlated to safety levels.
The more mitigation the pilots used, the higher their safety performance
records became. A study of spoken interaction in a factory setting (Pascal
Brown, 2001) revealed that half of all talk was social. The spoken interaction
of the factory manager illustrates this. Fifty per cent of the exchanges the
manager participated in were social. Social exchanges were an important
means by which the manager got the work in the factory done.
As it is not possible to teach all of a language, teachers and course
designers must be selective. Nowhere is this more so than in ESP teaching,
with its emphasis on specific purposes and the limited duration of most ESP
courses. It is often by selecting what to teach that language teachers show
their notions of what language is and their beliefs as to what is important
in language learning. This point was also made by Hutchinson and Waters
(1987), who claimed that specifying course content was value laden and
revealed our notions of what language is and how language is learned. In
short, the selection of course content reflects our ideas of language learning. See Fig. 3.4.

FIG. 3.4. Views of learning and course content.

24

CHAPTER 3

Based on their observations of general English language courses, Brown
(1995) and Richards (1990) list the following types of syllabuses. They also
point out that courses are often based on a combination.
Structural (organized primarily around grammar and sentence patterns).
Functional (organized around communicative functions, such as identifying,
reporting, correcting, describing).
Notional (organized around conceptual categories, such as duration, quantity, location).
Topical (organized around themes or topics, such as health, food, clothing).
Situational (organized around speech settings and the transactions associated with them, such as shopping, at the bank, at the supermarket).
Skills (organized around microskills, such as listening for gist, listening for
specific information, listening for inferences).
Task- or activity-based (organized around activities, such as drawing maps,
following directions, following instructions).

In EAP teaching, Flowerdew and Peacock (2001a) list the following types
of syllabus:
Lexico-grammatical (organized around structures and vocabulary).
Functional-notional (organized around language functions and notions).
Discourse-based (organized around aspects of text cohesion and coherence).
Learning-centered (organized on what the learners have to do in order to
learn language items and skills, not the items and skills themselves).
Skills-based (organized around particular skills).
Genre-based (organized around conventions and procedures in genres) as
units of analysis).
Content-based (organized around themes).

Some syllabus types (structural, functional, notional, discourse- and
genre-based) list the language to be taught. However, this is only one
possible way to go. White (1988) identifies three options, listing content
(forms, situations, function, and topics), skills (language or learning), or
methods.
One methods option is the task-based syllabus, a syllabus type that is
widely embraced at present. The task-based syllabus comprises a list of tasks
(for example, giving instructions or following directions) that the students
will perform. It is argued that tasks provide a purpose for using language
meaningfully and that through struggling to use language to complete the
task, the students acquire language. Prahbu (1987) explains:
Task-based teaching operates with the concept that, while the conscious mind
is working out some of the meaning content, a subconscious part of the mind
perceives, abstracts, or acquires (or recreates, as a cognitive structure) some

I S S U E S I N E S P C OU R S E D E S I G N

25

of the linguistic structuring embodied in those entities, as a step in the development of an internal system of rules. (pp. 69–70)

Long and Crookes (1992) argue that task-based syllabuses in ESP specify
‘real world tasks.’ By contrast, in general English language teaching, the
precise definition of the tasks is not a primary concern. Whereas in general
English language teaching tasks are chosen for the pedagogical value, in
ESP they may be chosen for their relevance to real world events in the target
environments.

NA R ROW- A N D W I DE - A NGL E
COU R SE DE SIGNS
A course developer is faced with a group of students who are planning to
study English for Academic Purposes (EAP). The course developer can
divide the students into classes according to their respective disciplines.
She or he could make two English for Specific Academic Purposes (ESAP)
courses, English for engineering studies and English for social science.
The course developer might further divide the groups. The engineering
students could be split into English for computer engineering, chemical
engineering, and civil engineering classes. Or the course developer might
not group the students according to discipline at all and prefer to design a
English for General Academic Purposes (EGAP) program. Another course
developer is faced with a group of mixed experienced medical professionals. Should the developer divide them into subdisciplines—nurses, doctors,
and medical technicians—or simply split them up into proficiency levels
and focus on general medical English rather than English for doctors,
English for nursing, and English for medical technology? The question is
how specific, or narrow angled, ESP courses should be.
Some approach the question of specificity as a practical problem related
to the specificity of needs. Dudley-Evans and St. John (1998) state that
where needs are limited, a narrow-angled course may be appropriate and
the course can legitimately focus on a few target events and use content or
topics from one discipline. Where the needs are more general, the course
can focus on a wider range of target events and use content and topics from
a range of disciplines.
Others approach the question by referring to research findings. Clapham
(2001) reports on research investigating the effect of background knowledge on reading comprehension in EAP. The investigation revealed that
although students generally achieved higher scores on texts from their
subject areas, this was not always the case, and sometimes students did
better on texts that were outside their subject area. Clapham concluded

26

CHAPTER 3

that as texts vary widely in terms of their specificity and students vary widely
in terms of their background knowledge, English for General Academic
Purposes (EGAP) may be preferable to English for Specific Academic
Purposes (ESAP).
Ferris (2001) describes two approaches used in designing ESOL academic
writing classes in the United States. The first focuses on developing a set of
generalized academic writing skills with the expectation that the learners
will transfer these general skills and strategies to writing tasks in their own
specific discipline (EGAP). The second focuses on teaching students to
analyze and imitate the norms of the specific discipline they wish to enter
(ESAP). Ferris surveyed U.S. universities to find that although most writers of
scholarly publications advocated the second position, in reality, the majority
of academic writing programs followed the more generalized approach.

SPEC I F IC A N D SPEC I F I A BL E E L E M E N T S
I N E SP
Needs analysis in ESP often focuses on the skills learners need to study or
work effectively in their target environments. Bosher and Smalkoski (2002)
report a needs analysis to investigate the speaking and listening needs of
immigrant nurses attending a nursing degree program in the United States.
Some of the needs identified were:
• Using paralinguistic features of communication (stress and intonation, and volume and rate of speech) in a clinical setting, especially
with elderly patients.
• making ‘small talk’ with clients.
• Understanding clients who speak nonstandard dialects of English.
• Understanding the instructors’ directions and following through with
step-by-step procedures in performing clinical tests. (p. 64)
Flowerdew and Peacock (2001a) report that skills-based approaches have
been particularly important in EAP and point to the fact that many learners
in South America have traditionally needed only a reading knowledge of
English. Studies often focus on identifying the skills needed for a particular
workplace or study in a discipline. See, for example, the metareview of
research into lecture comprehension in EAP (Tauroza, 2001). Flowerdew
and Peacock (2001a) identify a number of reading skills that research has
shown to be important for EAP learners including:
• Using existing knowledge to help understand new information.
• Recognizing text structures.

I S S U E S I N E S P C OU R S E D E S I G N

•
•
•
•
•
•

27

Skimming for gist.
Scanning to locate specific pieces of information.
Distinguishing more from less important information.
Reading selectively according to the purpose for reading.
Distinguishing facts from opinions.
Distinguishing main ideas from evidence.

Jordan (1997) lists skills involved in academic listening, including the
ability to identify:
• The purpose and scope of lectures.
• The topic of lectures and follow topic development.
• The relationships among units within discourse (major ideas, generalizations, hypotheses, supporting ideas, and examples).
• The role of discourse markers in signaling content of a lecture (conjunctions, adverbs, gambits, and routines).
But are skills ‘specific purposes’? Arguably the academic reading and
listening skills listed here are used in any number of reading and listening
situations. For example, reading film reviews would involve the reader
in distinguishing facts from opinions. In listening to a friend in everyday
conversation telling a personal narrative story, the listener again needs to
identify the purpose of the talk and identify the relationship among units.
What differs between listening in general everyday situations and in academic lectures is not the nature of the microskills being utilized but rather
the type of text involved (in this case, a lecture or a story).
In analyzing needs, ESP curriculum designers identify which microskills
from a general pool of skills used across a range of environments are
important for a particular group of ESP learners. However, if a course aims
to develop language skills, instruction needs to offer more than practice
opportunities. This argument was made by Field (1998) in relation to
listening. Unless a course sets out intentionally to foster the development of
skills, should it be termed a skills-based course? In my own teaching experience when working on a writing course for engineering students at Kuwait
University, the expected outcomes for the course were writing products,
such as abstracts and recommendation reports. The microskills involved
in producing an abstract (for example, extracting relevant information in
reading) were practiced extensively as students prepared their abstracts and
recommendation reports, but teaching did not deliberately foster students’
development of these skills.
What are the specific elements in English for Specific Purposes? Figure
3.5 shows elements I argue are specific or simply specifiable. ESP instruction

28

CHAPTER 3

FIG. 3.5. Specific and specifiable elements in the ESP curriculum.

is oriented to helping learners become more aware of language use and
conceptual content (including cultural content) critical in the workplace,
academic, and professional environments, and disciplines to which they
are headed. For example, instruction for the nursing students reported in
Bosher and Smalkoski (2002) was oriented to cultural content. One of the
needs the English for nursing studies course sought to address was ‘making
small talk with clients.’ What constitutes small talk in healthcare situations
is a question of content. The nursing students need to know what topics are
appropriate for nurse–patient interaction and in which circumstances small
talk is seen as appropriate. In workplace, academic, or professional environments and disciplines, certain language forms and features may occur more
frequently than others and certain skills are used more often than others.
These can be identified but they are not exclusive to those environments or
disciplines. They are specifiable elements.

SU M M A RY
This chapter has highlighted some of the issues involved in ESP curriculum
development. It can be argued that language varieties are based in and
extend from a common core of language. Or it can be argued that language
varieties are self-contained entities. Needs analysis can be seen as an entirely
pragmatic and objective endeavour to help course developers identify course
content that is truly relevant to the learners, or it can be argued to have a
bias in favour of the institutions and may overemphasize objective needs at
the cost of subjective needs. It can be argued that syllabuses should specify
content (what is to be taught). Or it can be argued that they should specify
method (how language is to be taught). Some argue that the ESP courses
should be as narrow-angled as possible. Others argue that this is not practical or that it is unnecessary as learners can transfer what they learn from a
more general course to their own highly specific area at a later stage.

I S S U E S I N E S P C OU R S E D E S I G N

29

QU E ST IONS FOR DI SCUS SION A N D PROJ EC T S
1. Do you agree that learners generally should acquire words of general
usefulness in English before they embark on learning vocabulary in
specialized areas?
2. If you were conducting a needs analysis in preparation for developing
an ESP course, what practical steps would you take to ensure that you
gather the perspectives of all the different parties (such as the learners,
institutions, and teachers)? What would you do if there were significant
differences in the perspectives of the parties?
3. Review the course book that you are currently using in your ESP class.
What type of syllabus is it based on? If it is organized around one element
in particular (for example, skills or grammar), how are other elements
integrated into the design?
4. Interview a teacher or course developer who has conducted a needs
analysis for an ESP situation. Find out what type of needs the analysis
aimed to identify and whose perspectives were investigated.
5. Do you think that ESP courses should incorporate a focus on the ‘soft’
social purposes or should only focus on ‘hard’ purposes, such as transmitting information?
6. Discuss with colleagues any problems you envisage in devising wide-angled ESP courses (for example, English for General Academic Purposes
or English for General Healthcare Professionals) and whether you think
you could overcome them.

F U RT H E R R E A DI NG
• A general introduction to course design and different types of syllabuses
is offered in chapter 10 in Hedge (2000).
• A review of practices in needs analysis is provided in West (1997).
• Coxhead (2000) reports on a study to identify general academic vocabulary. This study was based on a corpus of texts from academic journals
and textbooks in a range of disciplines from arts, commerce, law, and
science.
• Hyland (2002a) argues the case for greater specificity and narrow-angled
ESP course designs. A discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of
narrow- and wide-angled course design in ESP is given in Basturkmen
(2003).
• A range of issues in LSP course design and testing are examined in
Basturkmen and Elder (2004).

This page intentionally left blank

II
IDE A S A ND OP T IONS

This page intentionally left blank

se ct ion a

Language

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter

4

Language Systems

ESP teaching often takes, as a point of departure, the analysis and description of language systems. Hopper (1987) defines language systems as a set
of abstract structures present for all speakers and hearers that is a prerequisite for the use of language. This chapter examines three language systems
evident in ESP teaching and research. The first two of these, grammatical
structures and core vocabulary, are examined together first, and the third,
patterns of text organization, is examined in the last section.

GR A M M AT IC A L ST RUC T U R E S
A N D COR E VOC A BU L A RY
Concepts
Hedge (2000) points out that in general English teaching, there has been
a revival of interest in grammar in recent years and yet for many teachers,
grammar has always been a key focus of their instruction. It has been a
traditional idea that second-language instruction should focus on a set of
basic sentence-level grammatical structures (for example, verb tenses, conditional clauses, noun phrases) and core vocabulary. This idea has featured
in ESP instruction also.
One early approach to ESP, Register Analysis, was concerned with identifying and teaching the grammatical structures and vocabulary seen as of
central importance in scientific and technical writing. The approach was
premised on the ideas that although scientific and technical writing has
the same grammar as general English, particular grammatical structures
and vocabulary items are used more frequently. Analyses of scientific and
technical texts by Barber (1962/1985) showed that the passive tense is used
more frequently in such writing than in general English and identified a set
of subtechnical vocabulary items that were more likely to occur.
35

36

CHAPTER 4

Research
An EAP-oriented research project aimed to assess whether first-year students
from a range of disciplines in an Indonesian university had a sufficiently
well-developed English vocabulary for academic study purposes (Nurweni
& Read, 1998). The study investigated how well the students knew a set of
core vocabulary items. It aimed to establish how many words the students
knew and their depth of knowledge of the words, such as their understanding of the range of uses of the words. The study measured the students’
knowledge of vocabulary items in the General Service List (West, 1953)
and the University Word List (Xue & Nation, 1984). The former represents
the 2,000 most frequent words in English and the latter comprises 800
subtechnical words commonly used in academic English. The researchers
estimated that the 2,800 words from the combined lists constituted an
essential reading vocabulary as these words cover around 92% of the words
in academic type texts. To test the students’ vocabulary size, words from
the combined lists were given in sentences. The students were required to
provide a translation in their first language of the target words. To test the
students’ depth of knowledge, students were presented with the targeted
items plus a list of other words, some of which were semantically associated
(similar in meaning) with the targeted items. The students were required to
identify the associated words. In addition, students were asked to compose
a sentence using targeted items. The results of the study showed that, on
average, the students knew only 60% of the first 1,000 most frequent words
in English, 37% of the second 1,000, and just 30% of the university words
list. In general, they knew an average of 1,226 (44%) of the 2,800 words on
the combined lists and could correctly identify fewer than two of the four
word associates. They did not have a vocabulary size of 4,000–5,000, a level
generally regarded as necessary for reading academic texts.
Applications
In language teaching instruction, a focus on grammatical structures is
often seen in courses based on structural syllabuses in which particular
grammatical structures are targeted and presented to the learners. For example, in the course book Elementary Technical English (Webber, 1983), one
grammatical structure targeted for instruction is the present passive. The
form is highlighted and presented with a number of examples concerned
with engine mechanisms, for example, ‘the piston is pushed down by the
fuel and air’ and ‘the fuel and air are compressed by the cylinder’ (p. 88).
In the course book for learners of Business English illustrated in Fig. 4.1,
learners are presented with a range of structures for making comparatives
in English. The structures are highlighted and learners are required to

FIG. 4.1. Sample material: Forms of Transport (from Further Ahead
Learner’s Book by S. Jones-Macziola & G. White, © 1998, Cambridge University Press, pp. 34–35).

37

38

CHAPTER 4

understand how the structures are formed and then to produce sentences
of their own using these structures.

PAT T E R NS OF T E X T ORG A N I Z AT ION
Concepts
This section examines structures underlying written or spoken texts. A text
can be defined as a stretch of language. Scollon and Scollon (1995) argue
that language is inherently ambiguous. They distinguish between external
and internal ambiguity. External ambiguity is related to the contexts in which
meaning is to be interpreted. Internal ambiguity is related to the ways parts
of a text relate to each other.
Early interest by linguists in how people interpreted and dealt with external ambiguity in texts led to the notions of schemata and scripts. These are
described by Hoey (2001). A schema is the knowledge people have about certain types of event such as eating out at a restaurant. A script is the knowledge
people have about how these events typically unfold. In the case of eating
out at a restaurant, the sequence of events would include being seated, getting the menu, and giving an order. This knowledge is formed from people’s
experiences in life. When a person hears the word ‘waiter,’ this acts as a
trigger to activate that person’s knowledge of these events, which is then
brought to bear in helping the person interpret a text (for example, when
reading about someone’s experience in a restaurant) or participating in
discourse (for example, when having a dialogue with a waiter).
First example of a two-sentence text (contrived):
We had no record of the booking.
We were offered a suite on the top floor for a reduced price.
According to schema or script theories, a person would interpret the
second sentence by recalling his or her preexisting knowledge of hotels
and check-in difficulties and would use this knowledge to understand how
the second part is related to the first. The person uses his or her real-world
knowledge to deduce meaning.
Hoey (2001) argues that schema and script concepts are of limited practical value for the analysis of texts and teaching reading and writing. The
number of scripts or schemata a person may need is potentially limitless. In
practice, it is not possible to list and describe each and every one.
A second explanation of how people decode a text is that they deal with
its internal ambiguity. It is argued that there exists a generic set of patterns of
text organization. Various terms have been used in the literature to denote
these patterns, such as macro structures (McCarthy & Carter, 1994), clause

L A N G UAG E S Y S T E M S

39

relations and basic text structures (Winter, 1994), and culturally popular patterns
(Hoey, 2001). Those subscribing to this view of how people deal with the
ambiguity in language would argue that people interpret the second part
of the example text by recourse to their knowledge of pervasive patterns of
organization in texts. In this case, they interpret the first part as a problem
statement and this triggers recall of a problem–solution type of text organization. The second part is interpreted as the solution to the first part.
Patterns of text organization can be construed as a set of structures similar to (but longer than) sentence structures. Like descriptions of sentencelevel grammar, descriptions of patterns of text organization highlight what
are assumed to be core features of language. Hoey (2001, p. 6) describes
this generic set of patterns as the ‘nuts and bolts’ of language, similar to
the rules of syntax. Knowledge of the nuts and bolts can allow people to
have a generalized set of expectations about text patterns. To interpret a
text, the reader or listener follows the connections between the parts and
relies on his or her knowledge of the ways that parts (clauses, sentences, or
longer segments) are typically organized in text. One typical pattern of text
organization is cause–result.
Second example of a two-sentence text (contrived)
Interest rates on mortgages have fallen to less than 8%. The number of house
sales is expected to increase.
In this example, the second sentence would probably be interpreted as
a result of the event in the first sentence. This relationship could be overtly
signaled with conjunctions, such as, in consequence, thus, therefore. Even without overt signaling, the reader can infer this relationship. Some patterns
in English texts described by Winter (1994) are ‘general–particular’ (general statement followed by example) and ‘preview–detail’ (introduction
to an idea followed by particulars). The note shown in Fig. 4.2 illustrates a
preview–detail pattern.
According to Hoey (1994), the pattern ‘situation–problem–solution–
evaluation’ is very common in English expository-type texts. Other pervasive patterns identified by Hoey (2001) are ‘goal–achievement,’ ‘desire
arousal–fulfillment,’ and ‘gap in knowledge-filling.’ Texts reporting scientific experiments may illustrate the latter pattern. They describe, first,
what was known about the phenomenon in question and what remained
unknown. They describe, second, the test or experiment conducted to try
to ‘fill the gap’ and the results obtained.
Research
Three research studies related to the idea that there exists a set of patterns
of text organization are described next. The first two studies investigated

40

CHAPTER 4

FIG. 4.2.

Note illustrating preview-detail pattern.

the use of patterns of text organization in the writing of learners of English.
The third investigated the link between patterns of text organization and
text comprehension.
Kobayshi (1984) reports on a study to investigate differences in U.S.
and Japanese college students’ use of general–specific patterns. The study
involved four groups of students:
1.
2.
3.
4.

U.S. college students,
Japanese advanced ESL students in the United States,
English majors in Japan, and
non-English majors in Japan.

Groups 1 to 3 wrote in English and Group 4 wrote in Japanese. The groups’
writing of the same narrative and expository essay tasks was examined for
use of general–specific patterns. Results showed differences between the
groups. Group 1 mostly used a general–specific pattern, Group 4 mostly
used a specific–general pattern; Groups 2 and 3 used both of these patterns
but Group 3 used the specific–general pattern more often. The results
indicated that one source of lack of coherence in Japanese learners’ written
English is their preference for specific–general rather than general–specific
text structures.

L A N G UAG E S Y S T E M S

41

A study by Hirose (2003) examined the patterns of organization Japanese
students used in writing argumentative essays in Japanese and English. The
participants in the study were third- and fourth-year students majoring in
British and American Studies in a public university in Japan. All the students
had previously studied 1- or 2-year English academic writing courses that
focused on organizing and developing essays. The participants wrote an
argumentative essay, first in English and then at a later date in Japanese,
on the same topic—whether high school students should wear school
uniforms or not. A number of analyses were made of the essays. One analysis
aimed to identify which of three patterns of organization the students
used. These patterns were: Explanation (the writer’s opinion followed by
a supporting reason), Specification (the writer’s opinion and a preview
statement of a supporting reason followed by a supporting reason), and
Induction (a supporting reason before the writer’s opinion). The first two
patterns were considered to be examples of a deductive writing style and
the third pattern was seen as an inductive style. The results showed that,
generally, the participants preferred the Explanation pattern when writing
in both English and Japanese. However, whereas all the participants used
the Explanation pattern when writing in English, 3 students used the Induction pattern when writing in Japanese. The use of the Specification pattern
was not seen. Hirose suggests that the writing instruction had probably
influenced the students’ writing, and that as it is not difficult for Japanese
students to learn to use deductive patterns, L2 writing instruction of this
aspect of language can be effective.
Second-year students in an English for Science and Technology course
in a school of engineering in Spain were the subject of a study by Martinez
(2002). Martinez investigated whether the Spanish first language students’
knowledge of text structure (macropatterns) and signals in English affected
their comprehension of written text. The study made use of a written text
about body-water loss in humans. The original text comprised 21 ideas units.
Martinez reformulated it into five new texts, four of which displayed common patterns of text organization (cause–effect, chronological sequence,
compare–contrast, and problem–solution) and signaling words (such as, as
a result, second, in contrast to, a serious problem is). One text had neither a
typical pattern of organization of ideas nor any signals of text organization.
This text was simply a collection of idea units in a random order. The students read one of the texts and then were required to write everything they
could remember about the information in the text in complete sentences
showing how the ideas were related to each other. They were also asked
if they had recognized the organization of the text they had read and, if
so, to identify that organization. The results showed that the students who
had received the text with a random organization of ideas were less able
to recall the information contained in the text. The results also showed a

42

FIG. 4.3. Sample material from Academic Writing for Graduate Students, by J. M. Swales and C. B. Feak,
1994 (pp. 58–59). Copyright © University of Michigan Press. Reprinted by permission.

L A N G UAG E S Y S T E M S

43

significant relationship between students’ recognition of the type of text
organization used and their ability to recall information from the text.
Martinez concluded that the students’ conscious knowledge of patterns of
text organization led to positive effects on their reading performance.
Applications
Ideas about how people interpret texts can be related to top-down approaches to second-language reading instruction and listening comprehension. Top-down approaches encourage learners to make use of their
background knowledge to help them understand a text. Richards (1990)
compares top-down approaches to bottom-up approaches that view comprehension as a process of decoding successive levels of language from
sounds to words and sentences to reach meaning. Hoey (2001) describes
the reading comprehension process as follows:
As readers interact with a text they formulate hypotheses about how the text
will develop, and these hypotheses help them understand and interpret the
text as they continue reading. . . . Learners need therefore to be encouraged
to develop the appropriate hypothesis-forming skills and not to treat reading
as an exercise in language practice only. (p. 31)

From a top-down perspective, background knowledge can take a number
of forms, including knowledge of the topic of the discourse, the situation,
and the script (Richards, 1990). It can also include knowledge of patterns
of text organization. Martinez (2001) argues for an approach to teaching
reading in ESP based on raising students’ awareness of macropatterns in
text.
Postexperience ESP students (those who already have experience in
their target workplace, professional, or academic discipline) can be encouraged to exploit the preexisting schemata and scripts they have formed when
reading texts in their specialist subjects. Preexperienced ESP students have
no such ready scripts to which to refer. Teachers of such students may wish
to introduce them to generic patterns of text organization to help them
deal with the ambiguities that arise in interpreting texts.
Figure 4.3 illustrates second-language writing instruction that focuses
on patterns of text organization. The material is taken from a course book
on academic writing for postgraduate students (Swales & Feak, 1994).
The material highlights the pattern situation–problem–solution–evaluation, which is referred to as the ‘standard’ pattern. Instruction centres on
a sample text to illustrate this pattern (Item 1). The form of this pattern is
highlighted in Table 4 (in Fig. 4.3). In Item 2 students are asked to consider
whether the paragraphs’ initial sentences are key sentences in signalling the
macropattern.

44

CHAPTER 4

SU M M A RY
This chapter examined ESP teaching and research focused on three language systems. In teaching, primary concerns are to describe and ensure
learners are familiar with what is perceived to be the generative base (or
core) of English. In research, a primary concern is to identify and describe
the core structures. One of the major advantages of this approach to
language description at a practical level is that fairly heterogeneous groups
of ESP learners can be taught together; for example, English for General
Academic Purposes courses can be offered rather than English for Specific
Academic Purposes courses. This is because a set of basic structures, words,
or generic patterns of text organization is seen as the core, and knowledge
of them is a prerequisite to language use regardless of specific domain. In
line with this argument, study of language use in the specific domain can
come later.

QU E ST IONS FOR DI SCUS SION A N D PROJ EC T S
1. What role does the teaching of grammatical structures play in the ESP
classes you have taught? How were particular structures for instruction
targeted and was grammar instruction integrated with other elements?
2. Do you agree that academic vocabulary is largely acquired through reading and study? What role can and should classroom-based instruction
play? Should size of academic vocabulary be used as a criterion in giving
or limiting access to a course of academic study for second-language
learners?
3. Select an authentic text you might use with a particular group of ESP
learners to develop reading skills. Analyse the text for occurrence of generic patterns of text organization, such as situation–problem–solution–
evaluation and signals of text organization. Discuss how you could use
your analysis to develop activities for the reading class.
4. Examine samples of your own writing of expository text (descriptive
type writing) in English to identify whether you use general–specific or
specific–general patterns of text organization. Form a discussion group,
preferably with teachers from different first-language backgrounds, and
compare your findings. What might be the implications of culturally
variable differences in text organisation for writing instruction in the
ESP classroom?
5. Instruction focused on language systems is, by definition, concerned
with general features of language. Although such instruction may occur
in the ESP classroom, it should not really be considered as ESP. Discuss.

L A N G UAG E S Y S T E M S

45

F U RT H E R R E A DI NG
• Swales (2001) traces the history of linguistic research in EAP. A good
introduction to written text analysis can be found in chapter 6 of McCarthy (1991).
• Hoey (2001) describes patterns of text organisation that transcend individual genres and text types.
• Chapter 5 of Swales’ (1990) book discusses the concept of schemata in
relation to genres and acquisition.
• Connor (2002) examines developments in the field of contrastive rhetoric, which includes a review of studies investigating patterns of text
organization across cultures.

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter

5

Language Uses

This chapter concerns descriptions of language use and functional explanations of language. Descriptions of language use focus on the communicative
purposes people wish to achieve and how people use language to achieve
them. Brown and Levinson (1988) describe functional explanations as
attempts to locate sources outside the linguistic system that determine
how language is organized. ESP has embraced such ideas. Bloor and Bloor
(1986) write:
One thing that ESP, in conjunction with a great deal of recent research into
the language of special fields and genres, has shown is that the most important
factor for the effective use of the language is that the learner has command
of the ways in which the grammar of the language works to perform specific
functions in specific contexts. (pp. 21–22)

A functional view of language is seen in different types of linguistic
enquiry in ESP, descriptions of speech acts, genres, and social interaction
formulas used in professional, workplace, or academic environments. It is
also seen in attempts made to identify how words are used in particular disciplines (such as economics or law) to express discipline-specific concepts.
This chapter describes the different types of descriptions and examines
ESP-oriented research and teaching linked to them.

SPE EC H AC T S
Concepts
ESP instruction and research often includes a focus on identification of
the speech acts (also termed functions) used in target environments and
the language exponents preferred by members of those environments to
realise them. For example, a study by Blue and Harun (2002) set out to
47

48

CHAPTER 5

identify common patterns and regularities found in language for hospitality
purposes. By examining the interactions between hotel staff and customers at hotel receptions, the researchers identified speech acts frequently
occurring in this environment (such as check-in and check-out functions,
requests for information, and dealing with complaints and criticisms) and
features of the language used to express them.
Speech act descriptions are concerned with the communicative intentions of individual speakers or writers and are defined by the purposes
for which the speaker uses the language, for example, to make a request,
to apologize, and to report. Speech acts are a key concept in the field of
pragmatics, the study of speaker intent and what speakers mean when they
use a particular linguistic in context (Hatch, 1992). Pragmatic meaning can
be contrasted to semantic meaning. Semantic meaning is the sum of the
lexical and syntactic meaning that an utterance has in isolation (Stenstrom,
1994). This is an utterance’s ‘fixed context-free meaning’ (Cook, 1989,
p. 29). The utterance “It’s really late” can be understood at two levels. At a
semantic level, it expresses the proposition that time passed and it is late at
night. At a pragmatic level used by a guest at a dinner party, it may function
to excuse the guest or to refuse an offer of food or drink.
Generally, the person responsible for first generating interest in pragmatic meaning was the philosopher Austin (Thomas, 1995). Austin’s ideas
about language are presented in the book of lecture notes entitled How to
Do Things With Words (1962). Austin was interested in the fact that people
do not use language just to state things but to do things, in other words, to
perform actions. He also noted that people manage to communicate effectively. He argued that we should try to understand how people communicate
effectively with the linguistic resources available to them (Thomas, 1995).
Austin (1962) observed that an utterance simultaneously involves three
elements: (a) locutionary (the actual words uttered), (b) illocutionary (the
force or intention underlying the utterance), and (c) perlocutionary (the
effect of the utterance on the listener). In a hectic workplace situation,
someone may say ‘I’m busy’ (the locution), meaning ‘you’re disturbing
me’ (illocutionary force). The visitor disappears and gives apologies for the
interruption (perlocutionary effect).
Although speech acts may directly address the listener, in reality many
are indirect. Indirectness occurs when the meaning that is expressed and
the meaning that is implied do not match (Thomas, 1995). To illustrate, a
speaker, on hearing a knock on the office door, may want the visitor to go
away, but in many situations it would be thought too abrupt or rude to say
so directly. Therefore alternative, indirect means are used. These means
often stress the ability or desirability of having an action performed or the
speaker’s reasons for having the action performed. In the earlier example,
the speaker uses an indirect speech act and says, ‘I’m busy’ (the speaker’s

L A N G UAG E U S E S

49

reasons for having the hearer leave) rather than use a direct means, such
as, ‘You’re disturbing me.’
Hatch (1992) explains that following Austin, Searle (1969) classified utterances into a small set of functions. The set included directives (attempts
by the speaker to get the hearer to do something, for example, requesting,
asking, and insisting), commissives (commitments by the speaker to do
something, for example, promising, offering, and threatening), representatives (commitments by the speaker to the truth of something, for example,
reporting, denying, and believing), declaratives (acts that bring about a new
state of affairs, for example, ‘I hereby declare you man and wife’ and ‘I resign’), and expressives (acts indicating the speaker’s attitude to something,
for example, liking, welcoming, and apologizing).
The terms pragmalinguistics and sociopragmatics were coined by Leech
(1983). Kasper and Rose (2001) define these terms from a language teaching perspective. The term pragmalinguistics refers to the linguistic resources
needed by a speaker to express illocutions. The resources include lexical,
syntactic, and prosodic means of softening or strengthening the force of
an utterance and means of expressing it formally and informally. The term
sociopragmatics refers to the speaker’s ability to use and interpret speech
acts appropriately according to social norms. This ability is described by
Kasper and Rose (2001) as ‘the social perceptions underlying participants’
interpretation and performance of communicative action’ (p. 2). It includes a speaker’s assessment of social factors such as status and degree of
imposition of the speech act. Thus, knowing how linguistically to form a
polite request is pragmalinguistic, whereas knowing when, to whom, and
what it is polite to request is sociopragmatic.
Research
One thrust of speech-act-based research in ESP has focused on identification of speech acts that occur in a target situation. For example, Sullivan
and Girginer (2002) investigated the language used by pilots and air traffic
controllers. Examination of authentic recordings of transactions between
pilots and air traffic controllers at a nearby airport revealed that requests occurred frequently. Information about what kinds of requests were used and
how language was used in them was then used to inform the development
of instructional materials for the ESP course that Sullivan and Girginer were
developing for pilots and air traffic controllers.
In Applied Linguistics generally, a notable thrust of research interest in
recent years concerns the acquisition of speech acts by second-language
learners. The book Pragmatics in Language Teaching devoted to this topic
appeared in 2001 and brought together articles on various aspects of
the acquisition of pragmatics, such as the effects of different types of

50

CHAPTER 5

instructions in teaching compliments and compliment responses (Rose &
Kasper, 2001).
There is a considerable body of research showing that non-native speakers differ from native speakers in their use of speech acts. Bardovi-Harlig
(2001) reviews research (including research in an EAP setting) to identify
four areas of difference. First, non-native speakers can differ in choice
of speech acts. Investigation of students’ use of speech acts in authentic
academic advising sessions in university settings showed that native speakers
used more suggestions than non-native speakers and non-native speakers
used more rejecting acts. The research shows that native and non-native
speakers can differ in the choice of semantic formulas they use when making speech acts. Bardovi-Harlig (2001) reports that research into academic
advising sessions revealed that native speakers ranked the use of alternatives
as the second most preferred strategy to reject suggestions made by an advisor. The use of alternatives was ranked fourth by non-native speakers, who
ranked avoidance as their second most preferred strategy.
Crandall (1999) also investigated the use of speech acts by native and
non-native speakers in academic settings. Crandall’s study recorded and
examined students’ requests in meetings with university faculty. The study
aimed to find out how students made requests and the difficulties nonnative speaker students experienced in this. Crandall recorded naturally
occurring talk between students and faculty when they met in one-on-one
conversations during office hours. A number of requests were made during
these office hours, including requests for extensions for assignments and to
change the topics of projects. Part of the study had a sociopragmatic focus
as it included investigation of whether the native and non-native speaker
students approached the faculty directly or indirectly when making their
requests. Findings revealed some differences. For example, only one of the
non-native speakers used direct requests, compared to seven of the eleven
native speakers recorded. The non-native speakers used more hints than
native speakers to make similar requests, such as to ask for help with an
assignment. One non-native speaker requesting a grade change hints, ‘You
see the mark is very low’ (p. 121).
Applications
Ideas about speech acts underpin functional syllabuses. Two broad types
of speech acts (functions) addressed in these syllabuses are acts typically
but not exclusively found in speaking (for example, making suggestions
and complimenting) and acts typically but not exclusively found in written
language use (for example, defining and classifying).
Part of the rationale for speech-act-based and pragmatics-based teaching
derives from observations by language teachers of the lack of correlations
between students’ knowledge of language systems and ability to communi-

L A N G UAG E U S E S

51

cate with others. Research has shown that despite high levels of grammatical
competence, non-native speakers may still have difficulties in communicating because of a lack of ability to express speech acts appropriately (BardoviHarlig, 1990; Thomas, 1983). This may occur because they inappropriately
transfer speech act realisations or strategies from their first language or
have misconceptions about the target language (Crandall & Basturkmen,
2004). Whether and in what ways speech-act-focused instruction leads to
learning is discussed in the metareview of the classroom research on second-language pragmatics instruction in Kasper (2001).
It has been noted that some speech-act-based courses and materials
target pragmalinguistics with the aim of equipping learners with the linguistic resources to make a number of speech acts and to do so more or
less politely and directly, but neglect sociopragmatic aspects (Crandall,
1999). For example, a study of the treatment of compliment speech acts in
language teaching materials (Huang, 2000) found that although a number
of course books offered descriptions of complimenting in English, almost
none targeted sociopragmatic aspects of complimenting (gender and status differences in complimenting behaviours and appropriate topics for
complimenting), despite the fact that there exists a considerable body of
research findings on these aspects. Often, presentations of speech acts in
language-teaching materials are based on an assumption of sociopragmatic
universality (Boxer, 1995; Crandall, 1999; Riggenbach, 1990).
The teaching material shown in Fig. 5.1 comes from a course book
targeting Business English Skills. In this material, a set of speech acts (functions) have been isolated for treatment. These include expressing opinions,
asking for clarification, and making proposals. These acts, or functions, are
presented as titles for the boxes. The task for the students is to place the 20
linguistic realizations (forms) into the appropriate boxes. Students will see
that each speech act can be realized by a number of forms. This emphasizes
the centrality of function, that is, intended action in language rather than
forms. Students then are required to produce a diagram of a role-play
around the speech acts. Following this, the students devise a role play of
a speech-act event involving these acts. The material focuses the learners’
attention on pragmalinguistic elements (the language that can be used to
form the acts) but not sociopragmatic elements (social norms of use).

GE N R E S
Concepts
Dudley-Evans (1994) traces the origin of the term genre in ESP to a study
by Tarone et al. (1981) that investigated the use of active and passive forms
in journal articles in astrophysics. The study found that the communicative

52

CHAPTER 5

FIG. 5.1. Sample material from Executive Skills (pp. 54–56), by P. Minkoff,
1994, Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall. Copyright © 1994 by Prentice Hall
International (UK) Ltd. Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education Ltd.

purposes of the writers regulated the ways language was used in the texts.
The scholar generally accepted as being responsible for developing a genrebased approach to research and pedagogy in ESP is Swales, whose book
Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings (1990) has been
seminal in the field.
A genre is understood to be a class of language use and communication
that occurs in particular communities (Allison, 1999). The community in
which a genre arises provides a label for it (Swales, 1990). So, for example,
the medical community has a genre labeled ‘case history’ and the teaching

53

L A N G UAG E U S E S

FIG. 5.1 (continued)

community has the ‘end-of-year report.’ The communicative purpose of a
genre is seen as its defining feature, the feature that sets it apart from other
genres, and that explains its form and features of language use (DudleyEvans, 1994). Whereas speech acts were seen as deriving from the internal
drives of the individual to achieve his or her communicative purposes,
genres are seen as collective and socially derived.

54

CHAPTER 5

Genre theory seeks to explain the texts used by groups or communities
by reference to the functions of those groups or communities and their
outlook on the world. For example, typical functions of academic communities include dissemination of research findings, provision of descriptions,
and explanations of phenomena. These functions lead to certain forms of
communication including the conference presentation and the research
report.
Whereas speech-act categories are understood to be universal, as people
in any language or language subgroup would want to make requests, offer
advice, and so forth, the functions and outlooks of groups and communities
are highly specific. Scollon and Scollon (1995) argue that groups (such as
dealers in foreign exchange, the ESL teaching community, and U.S. corporations) develop their own idiosyncratic ways of communicating. Members
develop set ideas about what constitutes acceptable and nonacceptable
communication and reject communication and participants that do not fit
in as confused or illogical. As time passes, the conventional forms of a genre
attain the status of taken-for-granted facts.
A seminal article by Miller (1984), “Genre as Social Action,” contributed to a reconsideration of the term genre. Whereas genre analysis had
been concerned with categorizing text types in relation to how they are
formatted or according to surface level textual features, genre analysis
widened to become concerned with explanation of genre features in relation to the social context and led to a view of genres as typified responses
to recurring situations constructed by members of a community (Adam &
Artemeva, 2002). Approaches to genre analysis are now seen as existing on
a continuum between, one the one hand, studies that are grounded in the
analysis of texts and, one the other hand, those grounded in analysis of the
context and the community in which the genre appears. The New Rhetoric
Movement, which emerged from the 1980s mainly in English departments
in U.S. universities, represents the contextual end of the continuum and
has been influenced by social constructive theories that view scientific facts
as socially and rhetorically constructed (Swales, 2001). Hyland (2002b)
describes a social constructivist view of language as follows:
Language is not just a means of self expression. . . . It is how we construct and
sustain reality, and we do this as members of communities, using the language
of those communities. The features of a text are therefore influenced by the
community for which it was written and so best understood, and taught,
through the specific genres of communities. (p. 41)

One social constructivist theory, Structuration Theory (Giddens, 1984;
see chapter 2), argues that institutions have recurring practices (including
those enacted by language, such as genres) and that each time those in the
community participate in these practices, they become increasingly familiar

L A N G UAG E U S E S

55

with the cognitive perspectives of the community. Institutions are thus structured (produced, reproduced, and modified) as individuals participate in
recurring practices.
To participate in the recurring practices of a community, individuals
draw on the rules of play for those practices. The rules may be tacit, as in the
form of habitual or socialized routines, or may be codified into ‘standards.’
Yates and Orlikowski (1997) discuss the relationship between members of
community (termed organizational members) and genre rules:
When organizational members write business letters or engage in meetings,
they implicitly or explicitly draw on the genre rules of the business letter or
meeting to generate the substance and form of their documents or interactions. They also, in effect, reinforce and sustain the legitimacy of those rules
through their action. (pp. 390–391)

It is understood that genres not only result from the contexts in which
they occur, but also they help constitute and shape those contexts. Thus
there is interplay between context and genre (Freedman, 1999).
Genres are also understood to evolve and change in response to changes
in the needs of the community (Dudley-Evans, 1994). A genre-based perspective on language does not mean that genres are seen as fixed and static.
Genre rules constrain the communicative choices including choice of lexis,
syntax, and content but they are not binding. Individuals can and do challenge and change these rules gradually. Thus there is potential for genre
modification. Over time, because of that potential, new genres emerge and
old ones die away (Miller, 1994).
Berkenkotter and Huckin (1993) present a set of principles for genre
based on a synthesis of a number of diverse theoretical orientations (including Gidden’s Structuration Theory). The principles are:
Dynamism. Genres are dynamic rhetorical forms that are developed in
response to recurrent situations in a community. They serve to give the community coherence and meaning. Genres change over time in response to
needs.
Situatedness. Our knowledge of genres is derived from and embedded in
our participation in the communicative activities of daily professional life.
As such, genre knowledge is a form of situated cognition that continues to
develop as we participate in the activities of the ambient culture.
Form and content. Genre knowledge embraces both form and content,
including a sense of what content is appropriate to a particular situation at a
particular point in time.
Duality of structure. As we draw on genre rules to engage in professional
activities, we constitute social structures (in professional, institutional, and
organizational contexts) and simultaneously reproduce these structures.

56

CHAPTER 5

Community ownership. Genre conventions are signals of a discourse community’s norms, epistemology, ideology and social ontology. (p. 4)

Research
In recent years, much teaching and research in ESP has focused on the
study of the genres used in academic groups and workplace or professional
communities. Genres are seen as consistent forms of communication and
the established practices of those in the groups and communities to which
ESP learners aspire. Instruction in the genres used in the target communities is seen as a way ESP can help learners gain acceptance into those
communities. Genre-based studies are concerned to identify structures and
patterns underlying specific genres, that is, types of texts with distinctive
communicative purposes, such as narratives, service encounters, research
article introductions, and sales letters, and their role in the groups and communities that create and use them. Analysis is made of naturally occurring,
multiple samples of the genre and by investigation of its communicative
purposes and the expectations held for it in the community or group from
which it has emerged. Genre-based studies have been widely used in research in specific disciplines including research into experimental scientific
articles (Bazerman, 1988), genres in the tax accounting profession (Devitt,
1991), and memos in business offices (Yates & Orlikowksi, 1997).
Research into genres in ESP may include some or all of these procedures:
• Identification of the genres used by a specific community. This may include discussions with insider members of the community to identify which
genres are highly significant for the group, the communicative purposes of
these genres, and expectations held for them.
• Development of a corpus of authentic samples of the genre to be
studied.
• Analysis of the recurrent patterns constituting the structure of the
genre.
Figure 5.2 shows an adaptation of Swales’ (1990) analysis of research
article introductions. The right-hand column shows the moves and steps
that Swales found typically occurred in this genre. The moves are actions
taken to achieve communicative purposes. Collectively, the moves achieve
the overall communicative purpose of the genre. The steps are the options
that different writers use to make the moves. Swales’ analysis revealed
that research article introductions comprise a three-move pattern. Swales
termed this pattern ‘Create a Research Space’ (CARS). The left-hand
column shows procedures used in Swales’ approach. The text is categorized

L A N G UAG E U S E S

57

FIG. 5.2. System of analysis of research article introductions (based on
Swales, 1990).

and the moves and steps are identified and labeled. In some cases, this is
followed by investigation of the use of grammatical structures, vocabulary,
and discourse in individual moves and steps.
Zhu (1997) investigated the sales letter genre in the business community
in Mainland China. Zhu examined a corpus of 20 authentic sales letters in
order to identify the sequence of moves in them and to offer an analysis of
how the moves are structured. Using the approach to analysis developed
by Swales (1990), Zhu identified moves in the letters according to their
communicative purposes. The moves identified were:
1. Introductory section (optional)
2. Establishing credentials
3. Introducing the offer
a. Offering product or service
b. Evaluating product
c. Offering incentives
4. Soliciting response
a. Request
b. Using pressure tactics (p. 552)

58

CHAPTER 5

Zhu then analyzed the development of ideas in each of these moves, finding that generally the writers preferred a main-to-subordinate rather than
subordinate-to-main sequence of ideas in the moves. Zhu’s analysis allowed
her to demonstrate that the structural development of the Chinese sales
letter genre is basically linear and thus to offer evidence against Kaplan’s
(1966) argument of a generic Oriental written style in which a central idea
is developed in a circular fashion.
Zhu’s methodology included the step of consulting with 100 managers
of enterprises in China. The managers were asked to identify the most and
least successful letters from the corpus. The managers identified letters that
conformed well to Zhus’ model as the most successful.
A further example of a genre-based study that involved working with
inside members of the discourse community is provided by Hafner (1999).
Hafner investigated the writing difficulties of non-native speaker students
studying law. The study investigated how these students performed on
examination answers to ‘problem questions’ in Commercial Law. In the
study, Hafner asked four qualified lawyers to write their answers to the same
examination questions. Hafner then compared the sequence of moves and
language use in both sets of data.
Samraj (2002) investigated research article introductions from two related fields, Wildlife Behavior and Conservation Biology, using the CARS
model of Swales (1990). Samraj found variation between the two disciplines
in the structure of the introductions. The introductions from Wildlife Behavior generally contained the moves given in the CARS model. The CARS
model worked less well for the introductions from articles in Conservation
Biology. Samraj relates the differences to the orientations of the two related
disciplines. Wildlife Behavior is a theoretical field. It is a discipline in its own
right and it has an established history. Conservation Biology, on the other
hand, is an applied field. It is interdisciplinary and a relatively new subject.
As a result, the introductions from Conservation Biology display a greater
promotional function than those from Wildlife Behavior and thus are not
well represented by the CARS model.
Applications
At the core of genre-based ESP teaching has been a concern to identify the
genres that students will use in the target situation and then help students
to deconstruct them in order to understand how they are structured, how
the structure relates to the objectives (or communicative purposes) of the
target group, what content the genres contain, and the linguistic devices
and language use typical in them. Thus in ESP, if our students are a group
of medical researchers, we try to establish which genres are important for

L A N G UAG E U S E S

59

them in their work (such as articles reporting research, research proposals,
and grant applications) and then highlight the structures and features that
typify those genres.
In addition to showing how genres are structured as products, instruction can also focus on the ways of thinking of the communities in which the
genre occurs. Paltridge (2000) argues that as genres reflect a community’s
way of doing things, learners need not only to learn the linguistic formula
for constructing a genre, they also need to go beyond the text to an examination of the social and cultural context and reach an understanding of
the community’s purposes for the genre and the institutional values and
expectations placed on it. Teaching can thus serve in the “demystification
of the epistemological conventions of certain disciplines” (Dudley-Evans,
1994, p. 229).
Genres are specific to the communities in which they arise. Each academic discipline, each workplace group and professional community
serves a different function in society and thus their purposes vary, with
resulting impact on the genres that arise in them. A research proposal in
mathematics is different from a research proposal in history. A case study
report in business is different from one in social work. Research, such as
that of Samraj (2002), can reveal just how different the practice of a genre
in one discipline can be from that in another. Genre-based teaching is thus
often best suited for classes of ESP students with very similar needs who
are all targeting similar workplaces, or the same profession or academic
discipline.
One central concern for teaching is how best to help the learners acquire
genres. There is increasing recognition that the descriptions yielded by
genre analysis should not be simply presented to learners as formulas or
prescriptions in the ESP classroom. Santos (2002) argues that methodology
for genre-based teaching should aim to clarify but not prescribe genre
features. It should aim to identify patterns typical in genres but should not
try to impose them on the learner.
The material shown in Fig. 5.3 focuses on the genre of proposals in
business environments. The lesson aims to help raise the students’ metaawareness of how this genre is organized and language used in it. Each move
(termed main stage) is identified in terms of its communicative purposes.
In one respect genre-based descriptions are similar to speech-act descriptions. Both focus on communicative purposes or intentions. However,
genre-based descriptions focus on the overall communicative purpose, and
a genre is defined and interpreted in relation to this purpose. The material
in Fig. 5.3 shows that for the business proposal, the overall purpose is on
persuading the client of the need for the product/system. Because of the
need to persuade the client of the need for the product/system, one major

FIG. 5.3. Sample material: Persuasive proposals. From L. Flowerdew, 1998
(pp. 148–149). Reprinted by permission.

60

L A N G UAG E U S E S

61

move is to state the present problem, a second is to proffer a solution to that
problem (the product/system), and the third move is to proffer an evaluation of that product/system. The material leads the students in analysis
of the overall purpose of the genre and identification of the main moves
included in it.

SOC I A L I N T E R AC T ION
Concepts
Descriptions of social interaction are concerned with the strategies and
linguistic devices users of a language draw on to create and maintain
interpersonal relations. There has been limited concern with this type of
language description in ESP.
Brown and Levinson (1988) present a theory of politeness. They argue
that speakers and writers have at their disposal a number of interpersonal
strategies that they use to enhance, or at least not jeopardize, their social
standing and their relationships with others. There are two types of politeness, positive and negative politeness. Positive politeness is driven by the
desire to make the listener (or reader) feel good about him or herself. A
speaker may, for example, use strategies to make the listener feel included
or may praise the listener. Negative politeness is driven by the desire to
avoid infringing on the listener’s (or reader’s) territory and asking for too
much. Brown and Levinson argue that positive and negative politeness
strategies are universal but that specific groups or communities make use
of the strategies in different ways.
One interpersonal strategy is hedging. Brown and Levinson (1988) categorize this as a negative politeness strategy. This commonly recognized
strategy involves the use of devices by writers or speakers to indicate a
limited belief or commitment to the ideas or information they provide.
Lakoff (1973) coined the term hedging, describing hedges as words that
make things more or less fuzzy. A writer or speaker makes the statement,
‘The time may have come to act.’ He or she uses ‘may’ rather than saying
directly, ‘The time has come to act.’ This can be interpreted in two ways.
One interpretation is that the word ‘may’ is simply being used to signal
modality. The writer or speaker is signaling how probable he or she believes
the statement to be. The second interpretation is that the word ‘may’ is
being used to hedge the proposition that the time has come to act. The
use of the hedge is based on social considerations. The speaker has face
concerns about making a direct statement with which others may disagree.
Or the speaker feels a need to assume a tentative stance in interaction with
the addressee.

62

CHAPTER 5

Research
A number of ESP-oriented studies have examined the social strategy of
hedging. They have shown that it is, as Hyland (1996) argues, best understood in relation to the institutional and professional contexts in which it
is used.
One study, Vassileva (2001), investigated the different use of hedging
in Bulgarian and English academic writing to find that academic writing
in Bulgarian contained fewer hedges and more ‘boosters’ (devices to increase the pragmatic force of statements) than academic writing in English.
Vassileva concluded that English academic writers feel a need to show
more deference to their academic community than Bulgarian academic
writers do.
Bloor and Bloor (1993) investigated the ways economists modify their
claims. They found that the use of hedging was related to the type of
claim made in economics. They identified two distinct types of claims in
economics texts: field-central and substantive claims. Field-central claims
(those related to modeling and interpretation) tend to be hedged, whereas
substantive claims (those concerned with results) tend to be presented as
bold and factual findings.
Myers (1989) studied the use of hedging in scientific writing about
research, to find that hedges reflected the appropriate attitude for offering
a claim to the scientific community. Myers argues that as the making of a
claim of knowledge threatens the academic scientific community, the writer
alleviates such threats by using hedging.
A study of academic speaking in seminars (Basturkmen, 1998b) identified the use of hedging in specific functions in interaction. One finding
was that speakers used hedges to mask their opinion giving as opinion
seeking.
Applications
Descriptions of social interaction are based on a concept of language as
socially motivated. They are concerned with how speakers and writers
interact strategically with their interlocutors and readers. Different social
groups may vary in how they use strategies, and ESP teaching can introduce
these ways to students. The task of such ESP instruction is to offer a description of how universal phenomena such as politeness and hedging are
accomplished in specific disciplines and work environments. The teacher
of a class of English for medical doctors may, for example, want to describe
when hedges are used in doctor–patient talk and how doctors hedge when
giving bad news to patients. The teacher of an English for economics class

L A N G UAG E U S E S

63

may want to focus on why and when predictions are hedged in economics
forecasts, and the teacher of an English for business class may want to focus
on how politeness strategies are used in business negotiations.
The teaching material shown in Fig. 5.4 focuses on hedging (referred
to as ‘minimizing’), a universal strategy serving to make messages less
clear. The material presents ways those in a business environment might
hedge their messages and also how they emphasize their messages, that is,
make the message more direct. The aim of the material is to raise learners’
awareness of hedging and show how this strategy can be realized in Business
English.
The material first introduces the concepts of minimizing and maximizing and attempts to get students to recognize occurrences of them. It then
shows students linguistic realizations for minimizing and emphasizing in a
business context.

WOR DS USE D FOR DI SC I PL I N E - SPEC I F IC
M E A N I NGS
Concepts
This type of description is concerned with word or structure choice, which
words or structures are commonly chosen, and the meanings or uses they
have in specific disciplines, professions, or workplace environments.
ESP courses have, in past years, targeted the words and structures important in a given field. In early years, register analysis studies set out to identify
frequently occurring lexical items and grammatical structures in a particular field. The premise underlying the approach was that although language
use in a field—for example, science—is not different from general English, certain lexical items and structures would predominate by appearing
more frequently (Dudley-Evans & St. John, 1998). This approach has been
referred to as lexicostatistics (Swales, 1985, p. 2) and an early example was
Barber’s (1962/1985) study of language use in science.
With the development of concordancing software, it has become possible
for researchers and teachers to scan in field-specific texts (for example, textbooks or research articles from biology), to identify which structures and
words occur and co-occur most frequently. By studying the concordances, it
is possible to identify how these items are used in the target environments.
Take a hypothetical example—the word ‘supply.’ A concordance of general
English might show that the word ‘supply’ most commonly occurs as a verb.
Examination of corpora of economics texts may reveal that ‘supply’ is rarely
used as a verb in economics. To take another example, we may find that in

FIG. 5.4. Sample material: Emphasizing and minimizing. From Effective Presentations (pp. 38–39), by J. Comfort, 1995, Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press. Reproduced by permission.

64

65

L A N G UAG E U S E S

FIG. 5.4 (continued)

general usage the word ‘present’ is very often used as a transitive verb—for
example, ‘We presented the results’—and that this verb is rarely followed
by the proposition ‘with.’ However, if we established a corpus of texts
written or spoken by medical practitioners, we might find that ‘present’ is
often followed by ‘with’—for example, ‘She presented with severe weight
loss’ and ‘The patient presented with pain in the upper right molar.’ From
this we might conclude that ‘present with’ occurs regularly in medical texts
and that it carries a specific meaning in this discipline. Doctors report this

66

CHAPTER 5

meaning as roughly synonymous with the phrase ‘having symptoms.’ Sager,
Dungworth and McDonald (1980) explain:
To the extent that the organisation and structuring of knowledge is reflected
in linguistic communication the semantic approach is an important area of
investigation. In particular, it is necessary to clarify whether there are any
linguistic means of signalling special subject language items, and if so what
these are. . . . If special subject knowledge can be represented as systems of
content form, we have to examine to what extent they also have separate systems of expression forms and under what conditions they can share elements
of expression form, e.g. is ‘energy’ the same word when used by a doctor or
a physicist, or under what conditions can ‘velocity’ and ‘speed’ be said to be
synonyms? (p. 8)

Research
A number of studies have been conducted in ESP to identify words or structures of particular importance in various disciplines. The study by Tarone
et al. (1981) set out to identify the occurrence of the passive in research
writing in astrophysics. Research by Lindemann and Mauranen (2001)
investigated the use of the word ‘just’ in academic discourse. Ferguson
(2001) studied the use of if-conditionals in medical discourse.
A study conducted by Kirkgoz (1999) set out to identify words of particular importance for students of economics in an English-medium university
in Turkey. The study set out to identify (a) high frequency lexical items
in the texts the students would encounter in their studies and (b) the
meaning these items carried in the field of economics. The data for the
study comprised a corpus of textbooks used by the students and journal
articles related to economics. From this, 75 high frequency ‘content words’
(nongrammar words) were identified. Kirkgoz argues that the importance
of these words for the ESP learner (the prospective student of economics)
is that they ‘bear the main information load in expressing concepts of the
target discourse community’ (p. 148). Following on from identification of
these key words, the study then sought to identify the ‘shared frame of reference’ of these words. This involved finding the frequency of the significant
collocates of the word (that is, the surrounding words the key words were
typically used with). From these collocations, Kirkoz was able to establish
the ‘concepts’ central to meaning in the economic community.
One high frequency item was the word ‘cost.’ This word was found to collocate with the words shown in Fig. 5.5. In the figure, an asterisk (*) represents
the positioning of the word ‘cost.’ Words found four positions on either side
are shown on the right and left of the asterisk. One important concept for
the members of the economics community that Kirkgoz investigated was
‘opportunity cost.’ The item carries a specific meaning in economics.

L A N G UAG E U S E S

67

FIG. 5.5. The use of cost in economics textbooks and journal articles (from
Kirkgoz, 1999).

Applications
This type of description (the words and structures carrying disciplinespecific concepts) can be seen in ESP teaching. Figure 5.6 shows material
taken from a course book on academic writing for tertiary level students.
The material focuses on how the word ‘criteria’ is used in academic writing.
A concordance of ‘criteria’ is presented. Students are required to study
the concordance and identify how it is used by finding patterns in the surrounding words. Eventually the students are required to create their own
piece of academic writing using ‘criteria’ and other words focused on in the
unit (‘identification’ and ‘analysis’). The three words focused on have been
selected on the basis of frequency of occurrence in academic writing and
the meanings they carry in it.
SU M M A RY
This chapter examined different types of description of language use evident
in ESP today. One was description of the intentions of individual speakers
or writers (speech acts). Another was the analysis of conventionalised text
types and formats in different discourse communities (genres). Another
was the description of the ways speakers and writers circumnavigate the
terrain of interpersonal communication (social interaction). The last description was of the words or structures used in a particular environment or
field to express concepts specific to it. All these types of description focus on
language from the outside in. That is, they are concerned with the regularities or repetitions that occur in language use. Figure 5.7 shows a summary
of the different types of language description described.
QU E ST IONS FOR DI SCUS SION A N D PROJ EC T S
1. What links can you make between the language descriptions examined
in this chapter and your own ESP teaching?

FIG. 5.6. Sample material: Criteria. Reprinted from Exploring Academic
English (pp. 72–73), by J. Thurston and C. N. Candlin, 1997, with permission from the National Centre for English Language Teaching and Research
(NCELTR), Australia. © Macquarie University.

68

FIG. 5.7. Summary of types of description of language use.

69

70

CHAPTER 5

2. Study a published course book oriented to one branch of ESP, such
as English for Nurses or English for Academic Studies, to answer the
following questions:
• Is there evidence of a speech-act-based (functional) component to
the syllabus and if so, how is it organized?
• How realistic are the language exponents given for the various
speech acts?
• What additional information about the use of the speech acts in
the target environment could usefully supplement the description
presented in this course book?
3. Think of a group of ESP learners you may teach in the future. What
written genres will they need in their target academic, workplace, or
professional discourse community? Devise a set of interview questions
that you could use to interview inside members of that community to
identify the genres they deem to be important. The questions should aim
to elicit views on the role the genres play, the communicative purposes
they serve, and the expectations the discourse community has for them.
4. In what ways could you encourage your own ESP/EAP learners to investigate written genres in their specific fields?
5. How important is it to teach socially motivated strategies and formulas
in ESP? In your opinion, are politeness strategies and hedging ‘icing on
the cake,’ that is, nonessential items?
6. Conduct a small-scale project to identify the concepts associated with and
use of important words in one specialist area by following these steps:
• Establish a corpus of texts used in a target environment—for example, five texts written by members of one profession or academic
discipline.
• Identify five high frequency content words (nongrammar words) in
the corpus.
• Investigate how these words are used by examining the surrounding linguistic environment. Also investigate the shared frame of
reference of the items (the concepts these words carry in the target
environment) by discussing them with inside members of the profession or discipline.

F U RT H E R R E A DI NG
• Paltridge (2000) offers a general overview of different approaches to
analysis of language use.
• Johns (2002) presents an edited volume containing a wide range of
perspectives on genre analysis, reports of empirical studies into genres in

L A N G UAG E U S E S

71

various contexts, and discussion of classroom applications of genre-based
approaches to language description.
Articles illustrating the four different types of description examined in
this chapter in relation to specific EAP and ESP contexts are as follows:
• Crandall and Basturkmen (2004) report on a study to evaluate the effectiveness of using speech-act-based materials in an EAP teaching context.
• A study by Parks (2001) examines the ability of employees to learn workrelated genres. Parks compared care plans written by Francophone nurses
studying in universities in Quebec with those written subsequently when
the nurses were employed in an English-medium hospital in Montreal.
• Silver’s (2003) study examines how writers in history and economics use
hedging and other means to achieve an appropriate stance and to position themselves in relation to their respective academic communities.
• White (2003) examines meanings and metaphors associated with the
word ‘growth’ in economics texts.
• Willis (1998) proposes activities teachers and students can use to work
with corpora and concordances without a computer (well worth consulting if you are attempting item 6 in the preceding section).

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter

6

Combining Language
Descriptions

Chapters 4 and 5 examined different types of language description in ESP.
These were described in isolation to illustrate their specific characteristics.
Although some ESP teaching or research may rely on one type of description, many ESP courses of instruction or research projects involve a combination or combine descriptions of language with a focus on language skills.
The aim of this chapter is to illustrate this. Three examples are used: an
extract of in-house teaching material developed for engineering students
at Kuwait University, a course outline from a published work on academic
speaking, and a report of a research study that investigated language use in
a factory setting in New Zealand.

I N - HOUSE T E AC H I NG M AT E R I A L
FOR E NGI N E E R I NG ST U DE N T S
Genre-based language description
+
Grammar
Figure 6.1 shows part of a set of teaching materials developed for engineering students over a number of years by teachers working in the English
Language Unit in the Faculty of Engineering and Petroleum at Kuwait
University. This material is taken from the first part of the English 221
course. This part of the course aims to help the students write abstracts
for reports on engineering projects that involve innovative procedures,
techniques, or designs.
English 221 aims to help students develop their ability to write technical
texts. It is a Stage 2 course for mixed classes of undergraduate students
73

FIG. 6.1. Introduction to the abstracting unit. (This material is the production of teachers at the ELU Engineering Language Centre, Kuwait University.)

74

FIG. 6.1 (continued)

75

FIG. 6.1 (continued)

76

C O M B I N I N G L A N G UAG E D E S C R I P T IO N S

77

studying for degrees in civil, chemical, petroleum, computer, electrical, and
mechanical engineering. Students are admitted to this second-stage course
on successful completion of elementary and first-level English language
courses provided by the university. English 221 focuses on writing abstracts
and recommendation proposals, two written genres that are understood to
be important in engineering.
English 221 is a course about written language. It does not focus on
writing processes. It does not focus on skills development, although reading and writing practice are involved. To produce an abstract, writers need
first to extract relevant information from a text (a reading skill) before
reorganizing it (a writing skill). As these and other skills are practiced in
the course, the students hopefully develop them. The course, however, does
not set out in any deliberate or systematic way to foster the development of
these skills. The main focus of the course is on features of the two written
genres (how abstracts and recommendation reports are typically organized
and what kind of content they contain).
Two types of language description are offered in the course and this
can be seen in the representative sample of material shown in Fig. 6.1. The
main description offered is genre-based. Instruction is organized around
two genres, the abstract and the recommendation report. It aims to raise
students’ awareness of the kind of content typically found in these genres
and how it is organised in engineering.
The material in Fig. 6.1 first introduces students to the notion of abstracting. Then it highlights the first move in abstracts. This move is labeled the
‘thesis statement.’ The move is described in relation to its communicative
purpose (to explain why the article was written and its scope). Materials
following on from those shown in Fig. 6.1 focus on subsequent moves in
abstracts.
In terms of procedure, the students read a description of the thesis
statement (and the article from which the statement was drawn—an article reporting a project to manufacture adobe bricks for building). The
material highlights the purposes of the thesis statement and its linguistic
features—including the use of words such as device, method, and process—and verb phrases.
The verb phrase section marks a transition to a description of grammar. The material contrasts the form and meaning of the present perfect
passive ‘has been developed’ with the present progressive passive ‘is being
developed.’ Information is given about the use of these forms in general.
Genre-based approaches to language description often proceed from examination of the purpose and positioning of moves in a genre to analysis of
grammar or vocabulary use in those moves (for example, see Swales, 1990).
However, this differs from the approach evident in the teaching material
just described. The approach used by Swales and genre analysts generally

78

CHAPTER 6

is descriptive and is concerned with the choice of grammatical forms or
vocabulary in relation to the communicative purposes of the move and
the genre. The information about verb tenses presented in the material
earlier is prescriptive and describes verb tenses in the abstract as part of the
grammar system.
The material shown in Fig. 6.1 progresses from description of the structure of the genre (the first move in the abstract) to a focus on grammatical
aspects of verb tenses in general. As the course is organized around two
genres, it can best be described as genre-based. As the course involves some
general content on grammatical forms in English and their uses, it can be described as offering some (limited) description of English grammar as well.
A N AC A DE M IC SPE A K I NG COU R SE
Speaking-skills-focused course
+
Speech-act-based language description
Figure 6.2 shows a course outline (referred to as a ‘Language Help Overview’) taken from a published course book. The book offers skills practice
and development. It is divided into topical units including Health and
Education. There is a skills focus, and the course covers skills involved in
giving presentations (looking for ideas to shape a talk, giving an overview,
and rehearsing) and participating in discussions.
In addition, the course offers some language description of a number
of speech acts important to participation in academic speaking including
expressing opinions, asking questions, and asking for clarification. In the
work, a range of possible realizations for these acts are presented. Realizations such as: I’m afraid I didn’t follow your point about . . . Could you go
over that again? Could you explain what you meant when you said that . . . ?
Could you expand a little on what you said about . . . are presented for the
act of asking for clarification.
R E SE A RC H ST U DY I N TO WOR K PL AC E
L A NGUAGE
Speech-act-based language research
+
Investigation of aspects of social interaction
A study by Pascal Brown (2001) described language use in a tanning factory
in New Zealand. The study was speech act based. The main speech act

FIG. 6.2. Language help overview. From Speaking Student’s Book (p. vii),
by M. Rignall and C. Furneaux, 1997, Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall.
Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education Ltd.

79

80

CHAPTER 6

targeted for investigation was directives. Directives were identified in line
with Holmes (1983) as acts to try to get others to do things. The study was interested in how workers and key figures in the factory, such as the manager,
the foreman, and the accountant, used directives. It was motivated in part
by concerns to prepare non-English speakers for work in factory settings
in New Zealand and recognition that following (and giving) directives are
a key speech act in this workplace context. It involved study of who used
directives and when. It also involved examination of the syntactic choices
the speakers used (declaratives, interrogatives, and statements) in making
directives in the factory setting.
Data was collected from a number of participants who carried clip-on
microphones attached to their clothing. These devices self-activated when
conversation started in the vicinity of the participants and recorded the
naturally occurring talk between the key participants and others in the
factory. From the recordings, Pascal Brown identified directives (attempts
by the speaker to get the hearer to do something). Once the researcher had
identified and listed the directives each participant made, the participants
were presented with the list and asked to check that these utterances had
indeed been intended as directives. In this way, Pascal Brown was able to
collect a data set of approximately 300 directives made in the factory.
The data set was then analyzed for the following features:
1. The choice of syntactic forms by the participants.
2. The relationship between the forms selected by the participants,
strength of the directives, and the power relationships and social
distance between the speakers.
3. The use of modifying devices (hedges or other means to minimize
or maximize the strength of the directives) by the participants.
The primary focus of the study was on speech acts (directives) and the
relationships between social factors (such as status and distance) and the
language choices made by the people working in the factory. It also involved
a focus on social interaction and hedging.

SU M M A RY
Different types of language description are often merged in instruction
in ESP and ESP oriented research. Often it is the case that one type of
description predominates. The first example (the material developed for
engineering students) illustrated genre-based instruction supported with
some grammar focus and practice in writing and reading skills. The second example illustrated a course based mainly on speaking skills but that

C O M B I N I N G L A N G UAG E D E S C R I P T IO N S

81

involved description of speech acts. The final example illustrated research
into a particular speech act and involved investigation of social factors and
a feature of social interaction, hedging.

QU E ST IONS FOR DI SCUS SION A N D PROJ EC T S
1. Choose a published ESP or EAP course book. Examine the book’s front
matter (Table of Contents, Outline, and Introduction) to identify types
of language description provided. Also examine a sample chapter from
the book. Does any one type of language description predominate?
2. One of the arguments against a genre-based approach to writing instruction in general is that it can lead to a prescriptive approach in which
students’ creativity is hampered (Badger & White, 2000). Do you agree?
Is ESP an area of teaching where a prescriptive approach is justified in
any case?
3. Do you agree with the view that all ESP courses, regardless of their level
or specific orientation, should offer some description of English grammar?
4. Survey the language-focused research studies in one volume of an ESPoriented journal (for example, English for Specific Purposes or English
for Academic Purposes Journal). Identify which types of language description are provided in the work.
5. Select a written text or transcript of a spoken text that would be of interest
to an ESP class you teach or may teach in the future. How could you use
the same text to present two different types of language description?

F U RT H E R R E A DI NG
• Weber (2001) argues the case for EAP writing instruction combining
concordances and genre-based approaches. Weber illustrates this combination with reference to a course in legal essay writing for undergraduate
students of law.
• Badger and White (2000) discuss the strengths and weaknesses of product, process, and genre-based writing programs and propose an approach
informed by all three approaches.
• Pascal Brown and Lewis (2002) report a study that followed on from
the language-based research described earlier. The report of their study
discusses how teachers can use computer software to analyze authentic
samples of oral work-place language and how teachers can use such
analyses in teaching preemployment ESP courses.

This page intentionally left blank

se ct ion b

Learning

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter

7

Conditions for Learning

Chapters 7 and 8 examine links between theories about language learning
and ESP. Although explicit discussion of learning has been limited in the
ESP literature (see chapter 1), ideas about learning can be inferred from
the course and materials designs developed and the types of research
undertaken. This chapter is concerned with ideas about the conditions
needed in order for language learning to take place. Chapter 8 concerns
the processes through which learning is understood to occur.
This chapter examines two ideas about conditions needed for language
learning and how these ideas are reflected in ESP teaching and research.
The first idea (acculturation) is based on social considerations and is
premised on the idea that ESP learners need to be in close social proximity
or contact with their target discourse communities. The second idea (input
and interaction) is based on linguistic considerations and rests on the
argument that provision of sufficient linguistic input and opportunities for
interaction are prerequisites for language learning.

ACCU LT U R AT ION
Concepts
Some ESP courses strive to provide access for their students to their target
workplace, academic, or professional environments (these will be referred
to as target discourse communities in the remainder of this chapter). The premise behind this endeavour is that access enables learners to become socially
and psychologically integrated into their target discourse community and
that this kind of integration is necessary for learning the specific-purpose
language.
A link between successful second-language learning and acculturation was
proposed by Schumann (1986). Schumann was interested in uninstructed
85

86

CHAPTER 7

second-language learning and the question of why some learners fail to
progress beyond initial language-learning stages. Schumann suggested that
success or failure was linked to differences in the levels of social and
psychological contact that the groups of second-language learners had
with the target language group. He argued, “The degree to which a learner
acculturates to the target language group will control the degree to which
he acquires the second language” (p. 384).
A number of social and psychological factors were suggested by Schumann
as impacting on the level of acculturation and thus success in learning.
Social
Power Relations Between the Two Groups. A learner will be more inclined
to acquire the language of a group that is perceived as dominant, for
example, a group that has economic influence over the learner’s first language group. Dominance by the target language group is a more favorable
condition for successful second-language learning than nondominance.
Desire to Assimilate. Learners are more likely to acquire the language of
a group that they wish to integrate with than one from which they wish to
remain distinct. The desire by the second-language learners to assimilate
into the target language group is a more favourable condition for successful second language learning than the desire for preservation of a distinct
identity.
Extent of Shared Facilities. Learners are more likely to acquire the language of a group with which they share amenities. High enclosure within
the target language group is a more favorable condition for successful
second language learning than low enclosure.
Psychological (Language and Culture Shock). Learners are more likely to
be successful in learning the second language if they are familiar with the
second language and with the culture of the second-language speakers.
Research
Kirkgoz (1999) reports on a research project she conducted as part of her
work teaching English for Academic Purposes to students at an Englishmedium university in Turkey. The students were on a 1-year pre-university
English-language program. They had been accepted into various departments in the university but in line with university policy were required to
complete one year’s study of English and pass a proficiency examination
as a prerequisite to actually starting courses in their departments. Nor-

C O N DI T I O N S F O R L E A R N I N G

87

mally, the 1-year intensive English-language study program is an English
for General Academic Purposes course. Students who will study in different
departments in the university are taught in mixed classes. The instruction
does not involve, usually, attempts to create closer contact between the
students studying in the English Language program and the departments
in which they will study later on. Normally, the focus is on general academic
language and skills.
The study aimed to investigate whether studying in a program geared
toward acculturation led to better learning of English. The study wanted
to find out if students with more social contact with their target discourse
culture and language use in it would have more success in learning the
language. The research set about ‘acculturating’ students into their target
discourse communities while simultaneously offering them English for
Specific Academic Purposes instruction, to study the effects of this on the
students’ learning of English.
The research participants were students who were to study in the Department of Economics and Business the following year. The students were
divided into two groups. One group of students was the control group. They
followed the usual curriculum of English for General Academic Purposes
in the intensive 1-year English language program. The second group was
the treatment group. They were ‘acculturated’ into their target discourse
community. The treatment included a number of acculturation-oriented
interventions:
1. The treatment group was formed into a replica discourse community
(RDC—that is, a replica of the target discourse community). The idea
behind this was to enable the learners to feel they were already part of a
group related to the target discourse community. A special EAP class was
formed consisting only of students who were to study in the Department of
Economics and Business the next year.
2. The RDC group members were given a program in which they were
required to periodically attend the lectures held in the Department of
Economics and Business. The aim was for the students to share amenities
with those already in the target discourse community and have increased
social contact with them.
3. EAP instruction for the RDC group included content from Economics and Business studies. This took the form of introducing disciplinary
concepts and vocabulary, such as ‘scarcity’ and ‘opportunity cost.’
The study examined the combined effects of these treatments on the students’ learning. The students’ examination results in economics and business studies after their first year of study in their departments showed that
the treatment group members outperformed the control group members.

88

CHAPTER 7

The results of the study seem to indicate that students who had more
social and psychological contact with the target discourse community, the
Department of Economics and Business, were more successful than those
who had more limited contact. The teacher/researcher had set up favorable conditions for learning for her EAP students. She had increased their
contact with their target department in the university and created a replica
discourse community so that psychologically the EAP class functioned to
give the students a sense of belonging to a specialist discourse community.
Applications
A number of ESP instructional practices are designed to familiarize learners with the language practices of target discourse communities. But is it
enough for ESP students to learn this from the outside and simply emulate
practices? Or do they need to integrate with those communities? Do they
need to understand the mind-set of those carrying out the practices and
discover what Benson (1994) refers to as the “structures, values, norms,
and procedures of that culture, which may or may not parallel his or her
background knowledge from the first language environment” (p. 192).
The remainder of this section discusses the topic of acculturation in
relation to genre-based approaches to ESP. In line with Swales (1990),
genres are understood to signal a discourse community’s norms and ways
of thinking and constructing knowledge. Wharton (1999) identifies three
models of acculturation in relation to genre-based approaches in ESP:
Induction. The ESP course takes place prior to students gaining experience in the target discourse community. The ESP teacher explains the
genres used in the target discourse community and their associated cultural
values. The learners are offered opportunities to practice the genres in the
language classroom. Learners may be informed also of criteria for good
performance in the genres. Thus learning about and practice of the genres
takes place in vitro.
Adjunct. ESP learners simultaneously participate in their target discourse
community and take ESP courses. The ESP courses provide assistance with
the genres the learners are meeting in situ. For example, the learners join
in events in the target community while attending an ESP course. The ESP
course provides the learners with explicit information about the genres they
meet in these events. This information raises the learners’ metacognition of
the genres and informs them of the cultural values attached to the genre.
Apprenticeship or Mentoring. The ESP students learn genres primarily
through direct experience in the target discourse community. ESP in-

C O N DI T I O N S F O R L E A R N I N G

89

struction is offered as support and mainly takes the form of linguistic
assistance. The features of the genres and associated cultural values are
learned in situ.
The induction model is common in ESP. Students learn about the forms
of communications in the target discourse community in the classroom,
with the ESP teacher providing information about genres or other features
of communication in the target discourse communities and practice opportunities. Turner (1996) argues for genre-based classroom instruction using
tasks designed to bring to students’ conscious attention the value systems
of the community behind the genres. The aim is for the students to learn
not only the genre conventions (linguistic information), but also the ways
of thinking and the belief systems of the community.
Although classroom-based second-language genre instruction is common, some writers question its usefulness as an approach. Wharton (1999)
argues that students with experience of genres in their first language experience difficulties in acquiring the genre in a second language. Genres are
associated with particular ways of thinking and value systems. The learners
have already established ways of thinking and values associated with the
genre and thus the second system can be experienced as conflicting with
the original system. Cadman (1997) investigated the impact of instruction
focused on teaching the ‘thesis’ genre to postgraduate second-language
learners. Cadman found that the learners were perplexed by statements
of criteria for writing in their disciplines. Although they could identify the
desired characteristics in sample texts, they did not understand how they
were to achieve them in their own writing.
The replica discourse community group in Kirkgoz’ study (1999) represents an ‘adjunct model.’ The ESP teacher/researcher helped her students
gain shared facilities and social contact with the target discourse community. Meanwhile the students had classroom-based ESP instruction (note
that this instruction was not focused only on genre features).
The apprenticeship model can be seen in the study reported by Parks
(2001). Parks investigated the on-the-job genre acquisition by a group of
Francophone nurses of nursing care plans in English. Specifically, the study
examined how the nurses came to acquire the written genre of nursing
care plans as used in their place of work in an English-medium hospital in
Montreal. The nurses had originally learnt this genre during their training
in a French-medium university hospital in Quebec. The study found that
differences emerged in the writing of the nurses principally in relation
to their varying perceptions of the goals or motives for the genre in their
workplace. However, the nurses were able to produce acceptable care plans
from the start of their work experience mainly due to being part of the
nursing community and the scaffolding that was available for them from
colleagues and to their continual exposure to models of nursing care plans

90

CHAPTER 7

written by experienced Anglophone nurses around them. One of a number
of suggestions made by Parks on the basis of her findings is that one role for
the second-language ‘consultant’ is to sensitize learners to how to make better use of resources for help with communicative practices already available
in the community of practice.
The induction model of genre-based ESP represents a weak version
of acculturation theory. The learners are positioned on the outside of
their target discourse communities as observers of the discourse practices
and values of inside members. Through observation and emulation, it is
expected that they will come to share the mind-set of the inside members.
The adjunct model of ESP represents a stronger version of the theory. ESP
instruction forges actual links between the ESP students and their target
discourse communities, at the same time offering classroom-based instruction. The apprenticeship model represents the strongest version of the
theory. The student learns to communicate in the discourse community by
being a member of that community. The ESP instructor acts as a language
consultant. The various versions of ESP discussed in this section have a common premise: Some form of integration between the ESP learners and their
target discourse provides favorable conditions for language learning.

I N PU T A N D I N T E R AC T ION
Concepts
A second way ESP courses strive to provide favourable conditions for language learning is by their attempt to create an optimal linguistic environment, one in which learners are provided with plenty of input in the
form of exposure to the target specialist language and opportunities for
students to interact with it. Sufficient quantity and quality of linguistic input
and interaction are understood to be conditions favourable for language
learning.
The concepts of linguistic input and interaction as requisites for language learning can be traced historically to ‘natural’ methods in language
teaching (Stern, 1992). They are seen in formal theories of second language acquisition that have emerged over the years. Krashen’s Input Hypothesis (1982) proposed that learners acquire language by understanding
messages intelligible to them. They learn by being exposed to sufficient
‘comprehensible input,’ that is, input that is slightly above their level of immediate comprehension. The latter was referred to as I (interlanguage) +1.
Comprehensible input of the I +1 variety has the potential to become
‘intake’ (learning). Long (1996) developed Krashen’s Input Hypothesis,
arguing that learning occurs not because of input alone, but also through

C O N DI T I O N S F O R L E A R N I N G

91

the interaction learners have with it. Long’s Interaction Hypothesis can be
summarized as:
1. Learners can only learn what they are ready to learn (they have
their own internal syllabus).
2. Linguistic input is necessary for learning.
3. Learners negotiate the meaning of input to make it more comprehensible to themselves.
4. Through negotiation of meaning, the input becomes increasingly
useful because it is targeted to the specific developmental level of
the individual learner.
5. Thus input negotiated to fit the needs of the individual learner can
become intake.
The original hypothesis was later developed by Long to include a role for
corrective feedback. Long (1996) argues that negative feedback obtained
during negotiation of meaning contributes to acquisition (at least for vocabulary, morphology, and language-specific syntax, and L1–L2 contrasts).
Input provides samples of positive evidence of how the language system
operates or how language is used. Explicit negative evidence such as corrections or implicit negative feedback, including ‘recasts’ (reformulations
by another speaker of the same message but with improved language), can
provide learners with information they need to notice the gap between
their own output and target language forms.
It has also been argued that the level of attention learners pay to the
input in the language environment plays a role in intake, that is, a language
form or use is incorporated into the learner’s developing second language
in relation to the level of conscious attention the learner pays to it (Schmidt,
1994; Sharwood Smith, 1993). Schmidt argues that “more noticing leads to
more learning” (p. 18). According to these writers, learners need to notice
(but not necessarily be consciously aware of) language features in order for
acquisition to occur. The implications for instruction of these ideas is that
teaching needs to raise the saliency of language features (forms, routines,
and patterns) in order for learners to notice them. This can be done
through input enhancement or consciousness raising activities.
Research
The interaction hypothesis has led to attempts to identify the types of
learning activities or tasks that are more likely to create the conditions for
extensive negotiation of meaning. For example, a study by Pica, Young,
and Doughty (1987) found that learners who were allowed to ask questions

92

CHAPTER 7

about a written text had better comprehension of it than those who did not
but read a simplified version of the text.
Robinson, Strong, Whittle, and Nobe (2001) conducted an experiment
to assess the effect of a task-based approach on the development of EAP
oral discussion skills. In the study, three groups of learners were taught
discussion skills on a weekly basis over a one-semester period using different
teaching methods:
Group 1
Task-based method (exposure to input and interaction).
Group 2
Structured focus on form comprising task-based method (exposure to input
and interaction) + teacher-led posttask noticing (awareness-raising) activities.
Group 3
Traditional skill-based method consisting of learners being taught a series
of academic discussion microskills, for example, phrases for agreeing and
disagreeing and rules for turn taking.

Scores on tests after the teaching period showed that learners from
Groups 2 and 3 had similar scores and generally outperformed learners
from Group 1. The result led the researchers to conclude that “structured
focus on form, where teachers provide many activities for directing learner
attention to aspects of their task performance that differ from native speaker
norms, plus extensive whole task practice is equivalent to carefully targeted
and sequenced micro-skills teaching” (pp. 357–358). It should be noted
that the researchers point out that longer term studies of the effects of
different kinds of task-based methods are needed.
Applications
Input and interaction hypotheses have also led to proposals for task-based
language teaching. Tasks are devised that create conditions for negotiation
of meaning with input. ESP has embraced task-based teaching alongside
general ELT. Tasks are defined as pieces of work in everyday life with a
specific objective, such as painting a fence, filling in a form, making an
airline reservation. They are nonlinguistic units.
Jasso-Aguilar (1999) argues that task-based, as opposed to text-based,
units of analysis are required for needs analysis and course design in ESP,
and that members of target discourse communities can be called on to
explain the tasks:
Task is a more relevant and viable unit of analysis, since more relevant information is available in task-based occupational analyses from domain experts

C O N DI T I O N S F O R L E A R N I N G

93

and other sources; task-based analyses reveal more about the dynamic qualities of target discourse than do text-based analyses, and they also circumvent
the domain expert’s lack of linguistic knowledge and the applied linguist’s
lack of content knowledge. . . . Once the target tasks have been identified,
domain experts (not necessarily the learners, unless they have expertise) can
easily and reliably supply information which will later be analysed by applied
linguistics, materials writers, teachers. (p. 30)

As discussed in chapter 3, in ESP, task-based syllabuses are equated with
use of tasks replicating real-world pieces of work (Lynch & Maclean, 2000).
The development of task-based syllabuses needs to be based on investigation
of the real-world tasks the learners will undertake in their target workplace
or academic or professional environments. According to Long and Crookes
(1992), the design of task-based syllabuses for ESP needs to include:
• Identification of target tasks (target situation tasks).
• Breaking the tasks down into target task types (subtasks/tasks within
the task).
• Development of pedagogical tasks.
• Assessment of students by task-based criteria—as established by
experts in their field, not language.
The difficulty of the task or subtask (how many steps are involved, how
many participants, their roles, and the intellectual difficulty) is related
to the nature of the task in the real world, rather than conventional
linguistic criteria. During task completion when students are focused on
expressing or comprehending meaning, ‘pedagogical tasks’ may be used
to draw students’ attention to aspects of the language system or features of
language use.
A task-based academic speaking course was developed at a university in
New Zealand as part of an English for General Academic Purposes program
developed for students from a range of disciplines in the university. The
course is organized around three tasks:
1. Presentation by individual students of factual, literature-based information. Students research and then present definitions of two related
concepts or terms from their own subject of study. For example, a student
of political science might choose the terms ‘autocracy’ and ‘monarchy.’
2. Presentation by groups of students of a research-based study. Students
conduct and then report on a survey study, such as student parking problems at the university.
3. Reporting new information and explanation of a process. Students
read an article reporting a recent technical innovation. They then explain

94

CHAPTER 7

this innovation to a small group and lead a group discussion on it. For
example, a student interested in environmental issues selects an innovation
to use plants to detoxify radioactive emissions in nuclear power plants.
Each task is broken down into subtasks roughly representing how the task
would need to be approached in an academic environment. For example:
Task 2: Students conduct a survey and report on the results of the survey.
Subtasks
1. Decide on a research question for the survey.
2. Design data collection instrument (items for either a questionnaire
or structured interview).
3. Pilot the instruments in class to get feedback on the items.
4. Collect data.
5. Collate and analyze data.
6. Design presentation report and visuals.

Pedagogical tasks were developed in relation to the subtasks. For example,
the stage ‘design data collection instrument’ involves a task to raise students’
awareness of language use in interviews. The class listens to a recorded
interview and is led in analysis of question formation and strategy use.
Finally, students present their survey reports and are evaluated according to task-referenced criteria including their ability to report numerical
information, relate conclusions to findings, and design visuals. A sample
task specification sheet from this course is shown in Fig. 7.1.

SU M M A RY
This chapter examined attempts in ESP to create the conditions in which successful language learning is thought to occur. The first attempt concerned
research and teaching focused on reducing the social and psychological
distance between ESP learners and members of their target discourse communities. The second attempt concerned research into task-based instruction and teaching focused on tasks replicating the kinds of work the ESP
students will do in their target discourse communities. Figure 7.2 shows a
summary of the ideas discussed in this chapter. In the figure, TCD refers to
target discourse community.

QU E ST IONS FOR DI SCUS SION A N D PROJ EC T S
1. To what extent do you use real-world tasks in your own teaching? What
are some of the advantages and disadvantages of this?

C O N DI T I O N S F O R L E A R N I N G

FIG. 7.1.

95

Task specification worksheet from an academic speaking course.

2. How feasible is it for you to obtain access for your ESP classes to their
target discourse communities? What kind of access do you see as desirable and what practical steps might help you obtain it?
3. Do you think teachers of preexperienced ESP classes should preferably
be members (or former members) of the target discourse communities?
Why or why not?
4. Wharton (1999) reports that students with experience of genres in
their first language experience conflicts when learning those genres

96

CHAPTER 7

FIG. 7.2. Conditions for learning ESP.

in a second language. Have you experienced such conflicts in learning
genres or observed them in your teaching?
5. Parks (2001) suggests that a prime role for the on-site second-language
consultant is to raise learners’ awareness of the resources for help with
communicative practices that are already available in the workplace. List
practical steps a language consultant in a hospital setting (such as that in
which Parks conducted her research) could take to do this.

F U RT H E R R E A DI NG
• Johns (1997b) describes a linked (adjunct) model of EAP in a U.S.
university setting.
• Chapter 6 in Mitchell and Myles’ book Second Language Learning Theories
(1998) provides a useful survey of theories and empirical research on
input and interaction in second-language learning.
• A detailed account of Schumann’s acculturation model can be found in
Schumann (1978).
• Comparison of task-based syllabus designs in ESP and ELT are described
in Long and Crookes (1992).
• Ellis (2003) explores the relationship between research and task-based
teaching and course designs.

Chapter

8

Processes of Learning

The previous chapter examined ideas about the conditions needed for
learning and made links between such ideas and ESP teaching and research. However, language learning does not only occur because learners
enjoy conditions favourable to learning. It occurs also as a result of learners engaging in cognitive processes and mental activities. This chapter
examines the links between ESP teaching and research and theories in the
Second Language Acquisition literature.
Perspectives about learning processes can be divided into two explanations—intermental and intramental. The former explains language learning as resulting from the cognitive processes of the individual learner, and
the latter as resulting from the social activity of the learner (Mitchell &
Myles, 1998). This chapter examines two theories of language learning as
a process: information processing (an intramental perspective) and activity theory (an intermental perspective of learning). It also examines the
content-based approach to language teaching and ESP, an approach that
can be linked to information processing perspectives of learning.
I N FOR M AT ION PROC E S SI NG
Concepts
Information processing construes language learning as a complex behaviour composed of simpler processes. Learning is seen as an incremental
process. The processes take time and practice. Through practice, there
is development from controlled to automatic processing (McLaughlin &
Heredia, 1996). This involves two types of memory and two stages of learning—controlled processing and automatization:
Controlled Processing. Learners attend to a selection of simple bits of
information. This information is stored in the short-term memory. The
97

98

CHAPTER 8

amount of information that can be focused on at any one time is limited
because of the limitations of the short-term memory.
Automatization. The simple bits of information in the short-term memory are repeatedly activated through practice, and by this process they come
to be stored in the long-term memory. From here, they can be automatically
accessed rapidly with minimal effort. Once stored in the long-term memory,
they become automatic. Then the learner is freed up and can move onto
other bits of information and higher levels of processing, such as the
integration of groups of information enabling complex language behavior
(McLaughlin, 1987). According to Cook (1997), for teaching, the main
application of processing models of acquisition is the role given to practice.
The classroom can be seen as functioning to provide opportunities for
students to practice what they have learnt so that what they have learnt
becomes automatic.
Declarative and Procedural Knowledge
Anderson (1980) argues that information processing also involves the development of declarative and procedural knowledge. Declarative knowledge
is ‘knowledge that’ (explicit knowledge). Through repeated activation,
declarative knowledge becomes procedural knowledge or ‘knowledge how.’
We first learn the rules, and these are stored in our short-term memory. In
time, these come to be stored in our long-term declarative memory and finally in our procedural long-term memory. From here they can be accessed
rapidly and automatically:
When we learn a foreign language in a classroom situation, we are aware of
the rules of the language, especially after a lesson that spells them out. One
might argue that our knowledge of the language at that time is declarative.
We speak the learned language by using general rule-following procedures
applied to the rules we have learned, rather than speaking directly as we do
in our native language. Not surprisingly, this knowledge is a much slower and
more painful process than applying the procedurally encoded knowledge of
our own language. Eventually, if we are lucky, we can come to know a foreign
language as well as we know our native language. At that point, we often forget the rules of the foreign language. It is as if the class-taught declarative
knowledge has been transformed into procedural form. (p. 224)

Research
Evidence supporting the role of declarative knowledge in language learning
is provided by Muranoi (2000). Muranoi conducted a quasiexperimental
study of students’ learning of articles (a, an, the). The students were given

P RO C E S S E S O F L E A R N I N G

99

a learning task targeting the use of articles. Following the task, different groups received debriefing sessions by the teacher. Students in one
group were given explicit grammatical debriefings involving the provision
of explicit rules for article use in English. Other students received only
meaning-focused debriefings on the task. Following this, the students were
tested on their use of articles. Test scores showed that learners in the group
that had received the grammatical debriefings outperformed those groups
who had not received explicit information.
Dhieb-Henia (2003) investigated the effectiveness of metacognitive strategy training for reading research articles in ESP teaching contexts. Reading
strategy research shows that although students in second-language reading
programs may be provided with instruction in reading strategies, they may
fail to use the strategies because of a lack of awareness (metacognition)
about why the strategies are needed, and where and when to use them.
Dheib-Henia’s study involved students of biology who were taking reading
courses in two universities in Tunisia.
Students in the experimental group were given an introduction to the
research article as a genre. The introduction focused on the discoursal,
rhetorical, and syntactic features of the genre. They were also given metacognitive strategy training in their reading classes. The first hour of each
2-hour lesson was given over to explicit presentation and discussion of a
reading strategy and the second hour to practicing the strategy in reading
articles from biology journals. In the first half of the lessons, the students
were trained in different reading strategies, such as skimming, search reading and scanning. They discussed a set of questions:
What is this strategy?
Why should it be learnt?
When should it be used?
How can the strategy be used?
Where should the reader look?
How can you evaluate the use of the strategy?

Students in the control group received the reading approach normally
used in the local context. This involved the use of short reading texts, focusing on vocabulary and grammar in them and answering comprehension
questions.
Both groups of students took pre- and postcourse tests. Some students
also participated in a retrospection activity in which they were provided with
records of their tests and asked to recall how they had carried out the readings. Both test results and evidence from the retrospective accounts provided
evidence that presentation of explicit information about research articles
and the metacognitive strategy training led to improvements in proficiency
in reading research articles and increased familiarity with this genre.

100

CHAPTER 8

FIG. 8.1. Discourse skills for academic speaking. Reprinted from English for
Specific Purposes, Vol. 18, H. Basturkmen, “Discourse in MBA Seminars,” pp.
63–80, Copyright © 1999, with permission from Elsevier Science.

Applications
Ideas about declarative knowledge and information processing are reflected in ESP instruction that focuses learners’ attention on prespecified
rules, routine, or strategies (often one at a time) followed by practice of
those items. This is illustrated in the Discourse Skills for Academic Speaking syllabus shown in Fig. 8.1. The syllabus is specified as a list of discrete
discourse skills.
This syllabus reflects the view that complex language behaviour is built
on the accumulation of simple items or skills. For example, the students

P RO C E S S E S O F L E A R N I N G

101

are introduced to topic signalling devices in elicits (questions). They are
also shown extended patterns of elicitation. The students will eventually
synthesize the discrete pieces of information and be able to perform the
complex skill ‘being able to follow exchanges involving elicitations.’

L E A R N I NG T H ROUGH CON T E N T
In content-based approaches to instruction (CBI), students are presented
with discipline-based materials, and the main focus of instruction is the
acquisition of disciplinary information (Kasper, 1997). Content-based approaches “view the target language largely as the vehicle through which
subject matter content is learned rather than as the immediate object
of study” (Brinton, Snow, & Wesche, 1989, p. 5). Wesche (1993) defines
content-based instruction:
Content-based language teaching is distinguished first of all by the concurrent learning of specific content and related language use skills in a ‘content
driven’ curriculum, i.e. with the selection and sequence of language elements
determined by content. . . . Essential to all content-based instruction is a view
of language acquisition which emphasises the incidental internalisation of
new knowledge by the learner from rich target language data, while focusing
on meaning to be communicated. (pp. 57–58)

Proponents of content-based approaches draw on a range of theories in
second language acquisition, including information processing and Anderson’s (1983) Adaptive Control of Thought Theory in particular (Snow &
Brinton, 1997). Snow and Brinton argue that depth-of-processing studies
indicate that the presentation of coherent and meaningful information
leads to deeper cognitive processing by the learner, which leads to better
learning: ‘Depth-of-processing research findings are consistent with CBI, an
approach that, by definition, promotes extended study of coherent content
and relevant language learning activities . . . depth-of-processing research
provides support for the integration of language and content’ (Snow &
Brinton, 1997, p. 11).
Not all knowledge about language is explicit in origin. Rules and patterns may be acquired implicitly from the outset. Ellis (1997) argues that
implicit knowledge is ‘the default mode of cognition’ (p. 113). The sheer
volume of rules involved in learning a language suggests that language
learning would be an impossible task if each rule and pattern had to be
learnt as explicit information in the first place (Ellis, 1997). Like explicit
knowledge, implicit knowledge can be acquired first through controlled
and then through automatic processes. Implicit knowledge is acquired
without awareness. A new implicit ‘rule’ that is first accessed slowly and

102

CHAPTER 8

inconsistently (controlled processing) is later used without effort (automatic processing). Explicit information is learnt consciously. This compares
with explicit information learning. A new explicit ‘rule’ that is first used
with deliberate effort (controlled processing) is later used with relative
speed (automatic processing).
Research
The success of content-based approaches in ESP is reported in the literature.
Parkinson (2000) reports on the advantages of a content-based approach to
teaching English for science and technology in a South African University.
Among the advantages noted by Parkinson were that the learners were able
to build on their previous knowledge, were exposed to the contextualized
uses of language, and were able to prepare for the eventual uses to which
the language would be put. Hudson (1991) reports on the design and
evaluation of effectiveness of a content-based approach to teaching reading
English for science and technology at a university in Mexico. The course
was organized around the course content in the students’ undergraduate
program and included topics such as energy and chemical engineering.
Reading activities included tasks similar to those the students would actually
perform in their undergraduate program. Hudson found the content-based
approach resulted in significant improvement in the students’ reading
comprehension.
Kasper (1997) reviews research into the effects of content-based instruction to find that the studies have largely measured short-term effects.
Kasper devised an experimental study to investigate the long-term effects
of learning in a content-based course. The study involved two groups of
students enrolled in ESL 09 (a four-semester intermediate level reading
and writing course at a community college in the United States). The experimental group used a textbook of readings with selections from the five
academic disciplines the students were most likely to study in the college.
The students in the control group used a textbook of readings that covered
a wide range of topic areas that were not grounded in any particular
disciplinary areas. Instruction for both groups followed the same four-stage
instructional sequence with each reading: a prereading stage introducing
the topic and topic-related vocabulary and concepts; a factual reading stage
in which students extrapolated information from the reading; a discussion
and analysis stage in which the students synthesised the information they
had gained from the readings to write summaries and expository essays;
and a final extension activity, such as viewing a video on a related topic.
Kasper compared the students’ end-of-semester ESL 09 scores in a reading
and writing proficiency test and also subsequent academic performance in

P RO C E S S E S O F L E A R N I N G

103

mainstream English composition courses and their likelihood of graduating from the college with a degree. On all measures, Kasper found that the
students who had received content-based ESL reading and writing instruction had significantly higher scores. The results indicated that contentbased ESL instruction may have helped the experimental group members’
subsequent performance in the college academic mainstream.
Applications
ESP makes extensive use of content-based approaches. According to Master and Brinton (1998), CBI has the following features. The syllabus is
organised around subject content; for example, in a course for English
for Economics students, the subject matter might be a number of topics
from economics, such macroeconomics and supply and demand. Teaching
activities are specific to the subject matter being taught and are geared to
stimulate students to think and learn through the use of the target language. Language is viewed holistically, and learners learn from working with
whole chunks of language and multiple skills. Content-based approaches
reject ‘synthetic’ approaches to course design—the idea that language or
skills can be atomized into discrete items to be presented and practiced by
learners one at a time. The approach makes use of authentic texts to which
learners are expected primarily to respond in relation to the content. It has
been argued (Hutchinson & Waters, 1987) that once we remove the text
from its original context, it loses some of its authenticity. For example, the
intended audience is changed once the authentic text is imported into the
classroom. Authenticity also relates also to the reader’s purpose in reading
the text. For example, recommendation reports for the purchase of technical equipment are, in their original context of use, devised for the purpose
of helping the reader decide which of two or more items of equipment to
buy. If, however, a recommendation report is transported into a language
teaching classroom and students are given an activity whose purpose is to
answer comprehension questions on it, the match between text and task is
artificial. Content-based instruction tries to avoid some of these potential
problems by using content (authentic texts) in ways that were similar to
those in real life. Content-based approaches involve also the integration
of skills. Writing often follows on from listening and reading, and students
are often required to synthesize facts and ideas from multiple sources as
preparation for writing (Brinton et al., 1989).
In short, the key features of CBI are:
1. Content is the organizing unit of course design.
2. Skills are integrated.

104

CHAPTER 8

3. Language is approached holistically.
4. Extensive use of authentic texts.
Bishop-Petty and Engel (2001) report on a content-based approach used
at the Defence Language Institute at San Antonio, Texas. This institute
works with students who are experienced military personnel from a number
of countries around the world. Previous attempts were made in the Institute
to construct language courses based on a synthetic approach to language
(the prespecification of language items to be presented and practiced one
at a time), but these attempts were unsuccessful and have largely been
replaced with a content-based approach.
To illustrate the content-based approach used and the view of learning
underlying it at the Defence Language Institute, I outline one ‘project’ that
the students work on during their program of English Language Instruction there. The project entails the students working on topics from their
own specialist areas and making use of study guides collated by the language
instructors. The guides are organized into subject areas within the students’
specialist areas. For example, a military pilot might chose to work on the
subject of air turbulence, a topic within ‘aviation.’
To prepare the project, Bishop-Petty and Engel (2001) contacted airforce personnel to identify potential topics. For example, aviation personnel suggested topics such as air turbulence, aerodynamics, formation
flying, air combat, and spatial disorientation. Having identified suitable
topics, Bishop-Petty and Engel collected a wide range of reference sources
(authentic readings, Web sites addresses, and articles) to form study guides
for each topic.
The study guides consist of two parts:
Part 1. Resources
• Texts and references materials, such as an aircraft technical dictionary, a
handbook on basic helicopter maintenance, aircraft manuals.
• Topics for impromtu talks and ‘briefings’ (formal presentations).
The texts are drawn from the actual work environment of the students.
The topics for the briefings replicate the type of subjects students might be
called to talk on in the target environment. For example, one briefing topic
is: Discuss possible malfunctions of a fuel system and how the pilot should
respond.
Part 2. Activities
• Authentic reading and listening texts with questions and vocabulary
work sheets for self-study.
This section provides pedagogical rather than real-world tasks.
Students select a topic they want to work on, select materials from the
resources and activities, and then use them to work on the language and prepare their briefings.

P RO C E S S E S O F L E A R N I N G

105

AC T I V I T Y T H EORY — A N ECOLOGIC A L
PE R SPEC T I V E
Concepts
This chapter so far has concerned conceptualizations of learning as an
individual activity, an activity in which learners mentally process language in
order to acquire it. This section deals with a very different view—a view of
learning as a social activity. Although sociocultural perspectives on learning
are not new (a sociocultural perspective on learning was proposed by Vygotsky in the early 20th century), it is only fairly recently that the literature
on language teaching has turned its attention to this subject. A number of
Vygotsky’s ideas have recently been taken up in the literature and applied
to studies of second-language learning (Lantolf, 2000).
Discussion of sociocultural theory focuses on two central ideas. The
first is the proposal that learning arises from and through social interaction. Learning is seen as, first, intermental (social) and then, second, as
intramental (individual). Learning, therefore, is a two-stage process. For
example, a learner is faced with a task he or she is unable to complete with
his or her present knowledge and skills. However, the learner works on
the task in collaboration with a more knowledgeable or skilful individual.
That individual offers supportive dialogue to the learner as they work
on the task together. By means of this supportive dialogue, the learner
comes to share in the more expert individual’s consciousness about how to
complete the task. This supportive process is known as scaffolding. Learning
is most productive if scaffolding is offered when the learner is in the Zone
of Proximal Development (ZPD)—that is, the learner is nearly ready to
function independently. Collaborative dialogic support from more capable
individuals at this stage enables the learner to ‘appropriate’ (acquire) the
concepts needed to do the task. As a result, the learner will be able to work
independently on the task in the future (Mitchell & Myles, 1998).
A second idea is that learners actively construct their own learning environment. According to Mitchell & Myles (1998), social–cultural theorists
reject transmission and computational models of learning in which learners
receive or work on the language input they are provided with. They reject
such models on the grounds that these models construe the learner as a
passive recipient and what is learnt is determined by others, such as teachers
and course designers. Such models construe teaching as providing input
and learning as the taking in of input. In contrast, sociocultural theorists
claim that learners shape their own learning, and they do so because they
have their own individual goals. This perspective, known as activity theory,
was developed by Leontiev, one of Vygotsky’s successors.

106

CHAPTER 8

Roebuck (2000) describes Leontiev’s theory. Human activity is construed
as a complex process, and the properties of any activity are seen as determined by the sociohistorical setting and by the goals and sociocultural history of the participants. Activity theory focuses on how individuals construct
goals in unique ways and then carry out activities to achieve their own goals.
In terms of language learning, this means that students play an important
role in shaping the goals for and ultimate outcomes of tasks set for them
by their teachers. So the key to understanding learning is to find out how
individual learners have decided to engage with the task as an activity.
Van Lier (2000) proposes an ecological perspective on activity theory.
He argues that the learner is immersed in an environment full of potential
meanings and ‘affordances,’ and what the learner uses in this environment is dependant on what he or she wants and does. An affordance (for
example, a leaf in the forest) offers different uses to different creatures in
the forest. One creature may use the leaf for shade while another uses it for
food. The properties of the leaf do not change, but different properties are
perceived in it and acted on by different organisms. So in language learning, the same affordances will be perceived differently by different learners
and used for different forms of linguistic actions. The affordances vary
according to the different goals of the students, and what the students learn
from the affordances in the language learning environment (for example,
the classroom) varies also.
Van Lier’s (2002) ecological view represents a major shift from an
input–output view of learning to a view of learning as dependant on the
quality of social interaction that occurs in the classroom. He argues that
success from this perspective is judged on the quality of interaction between
students and between teacher and students. Social interaction must be
geared toward conversational symmetry. The task of the language teacher
is ‘to create learning opportunities for the students, to encourage them
to be engaged, and to surround them with language experiences that can
become affordances through meaningful social interaction’ (p. 15).
Research and Applications
Studies based on activity theory have investigated how learners construct
their own goals in instructed second-language learning. Donato (2000)
reports the case of the same task being given by an ESL teacher to different
groups of students in the one class. Each group interpreted the task differently. As a result, the task became a different activity for each group, and
each group had a different goal and set about the task in different ways.
Roebuck (2000) describes an experimental study in which students carried
out a written recall task. The task required the students to write a report

P RO C E S S E S O F L E A R N I N G

107

of newspaper articles in the second language. Some students oriented
themselves to the goal of writing a report of the article, but others oriented
themselves to using the task to understand the article themselves rather
than to tell someone else about it.
As yet, the literature concerned with sociocultural perspectives in ESP
is limited. One example is an exploratory study that investigated learner
perspectives of success in an EAP writing course (Basturkmen & Lewis,
2002). Working from the perspective of activity theory, the study set out to
examine how three students, in the same EAP writing course in a university
setting in New Zealand, constructed success and their goals for studying
academic writing. E-mail dialogues were set up between the researchers and
the students to elicit the students’ perceptions of what constituted success
for them in the course, how successful they felt they were in their academic
writing course, and what factors (for example, activities) they related their
success to. The two teachers of the three students were also engaged in
e-mail dialogues to elicit their perspectives of the three students and also
which of the writing course objectives they emphasised in their teaching.
The study found that although there were some similarities in the students’ constructs of success, there were mostly differences. For example,
one student equated success largely with her growing ability to express
her ideas in academic writing. Another equated success to her increased
knowledge of academic writing conventions. This student had set out to
meet the expectations of the academic community. The researchers found
that although the three students had attended the same course with the
same textbook and assignments (and, in the case of two students, had attended the same class with the same teacher), their interpretations of what
constituted success was highly individual. This suggested that the students
had pursued different objectives. The findings thus supported the premise
of activity theory that the same activity means different things to different
people.

SU M M A RY
This chapter examined ideas about the processes by which language acquisition occurs. Information processing offered a view of learning as an
individual mental activity. Advocates of content-based approaches argue
that language is best learned through the process of learning disciplinary
or technical subject content. Activity theory offered a sociocultural view of
learning as a two-stage process—intermental and then intramental.
Activity theory also offered a view of learning as shaped and constructed
by the goals of the learners. What would be the implications of this view for

108

CHAPTER 8

ESP teaching? ESP has conventionally been centred on needs analysis and
course design, with the often implicit assumption being made that what
the ESP course teaches, the students will (all being well) learn—a computational view of learning; that is, teachers provide the input and students
work on this to make it intake. However, activity theory suggests that it is
the learners who determine what they will learn and the same instructional
task or activity is typically used by different learners for different learning
objectives, and thus that the students learn different things from them. ESP
teachers accepting this position may need to rethink aspects of their traditional role in the classroom. For example, they would need to reorientate
themselves away from being the providers of relevant input in the classroom
and toward a role of scaffolding (that is, offering supportive dialogue) as
they work alongside learners to complete language tasks.

QU E ST IONS FOR DI SCUS SION A N D PROJ EC T S
1. How important is the presentation and subsequent practice of particular
skills, strategies, or language items in your ESP teaching?
2. Dhieb-Henia (2003) investigated the effects of metacognitive strategy
training in reading instruction. Do you know of other ESP courses
that offer metacognitive strategy training? If so, what does the training
involve?
3. To what extent do you expose your ESP class to content from various
sources in their subject area? Would you describe your approach as
content-based?
4. What objections might students and institutional representatives make if
you tried to implement a purely content-based approach in your teaching situation? List arguments you could make to counter them.
5. Describe any experiences of scaffolding (as a teacher or learner) that
you have experienced.
6. Basturkmen and Lewis (2002) investigated their learners’ perspectives
of success in an academic writing class. They corresponded with the students by e-mail to collect information. What learner perspectives might
you like to investigate and how would you collect information?

F U RT H E R R E A DI NG
• Concepts of explicit knowledge, implicit knowledge, controlled processing, and automatic processing are examined in Ellis (1997).
• Johns (1997a) discusses the relationship between ESP and content-based
instruction.

P RO C E S S E S O F L E A R N I N G

109

• An introduction to the theoretical bases of content-based instruction and
descriptions of content-based programs in a variety of settings are offered
in Snow and Brinton (1997) and Brinton et al. (1989).
• Lantolf (2000) provides a collection of articles focusing on aspects of
sociocultural theory in relation to second-language learning.

This page intentionally left blank

se ct ion c

Teaching

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter

9

Methodologies

This chapter examines methodology in ESP and describes four macrostrategies used in teaching. The term macrostrategy was coined by Stern (1992)
to refer to an overriding methodological principle covering a wide variety
of classroom techniques and procedures at the planned level of teaching.
The chapter illustrates strategies found in ESP teaching, using instructional
materials and lesson plans developed by teachers for specific classes. Some
of the materials have subsequently been published. Instructional materials
and lesson plans embody views of learning (Tomlinson, 1998). These views
of learning can be inferred from the activities the materials and plans
propose and how they are sequenced. For example, three different teachers
of English for Business Purposes develop instructional materials with a common focus—a role play about dealing with difficult customers in a service
encounter. The material developed by one teacher incorporates a ‘language
focus’ stage (ways to express acknowledgement) prior to a role-play task.
The material developed by the second teacher does not include a language
focus stage at all, and that of the third teacher does include a language
focus stage (again, ways to express acknowledgment) but sequenced after
the role-play stage and in the form of a debriefing. The material of the first
teacher incorporated a language description stage before a student production stage (the role play). It may be inferred from this that the teacher
expects that drawing the students’ attention to language forms prior to
production work may result in the students using those forms in their
production. The teacher sees these stages and sequencing as beneficial for
learning. The material of the second teacher involves a student production
task (the role play) only. The material of the third teacher includes a language description stage but it is sequenced after the role play. The teacher
may expect that when students have first struggled to produce their own
language in the role play they will be mentally receptive to a description of
113

114

CHAPTER 9

language that highlights language they needed but lacked for the role play.
In this chapter I link ideas in the literature on second language acquisition
to materials developed by ESP teachers. The links I describe are based on
inferences I have made.
It has been noted that ESP teachers tend to produce their own instructional materials rather than relying on commercially produced ones
(Hutchinson & Waters, 1987). This can be attributed largely to the fact
that ESP classes are convened to deal with the specific needs of the students. Such needs can usually be addressed only partially by commercially
available materials that were developed with a general audience in mind.
Examination of the instructional materials and plans can offer insights
into the ‘practical consciousness’ (see discussion of Structuration Theory in
chapter 2) of ESP teachers.
It is debatable whether ESP has a distinctive methodology. Robinson
(1991) argues that methodology in English Language Teaching (ELT) and
ESP differ little and that it is not possible to say whether general ELT has
borrowed ideas for methodology from ESP or whether ESP has borrowed
ideas from general ELT. Robinson identifies two characteristic features
of ESP methodology: ESP can base activities on students’ specialism (but
need not do so), and ESP activities can (but may not) have a truly authentic
purpose derived from students’ target needs. Dudley-Evans and St. John
(1998) maintain that what characterizes ESP methodology is the use of
tasks and activities reflecting the students’ specialist areas. Postexperience
ESP learners have specialist knowledge from working or studying in their
specialist areas and a ‘deep-end strategy’ (p. 190) can be used. In a deepend strategy, students’ performance of a task is the point of departure for
instruction. Watson Todd (2003) reports that six approaches have been
emphasised in the EAP literature: inductive learning, process syllabuses,
learner autonomy, use of authentic materials and tasks, integration of
teaching and technology and team teaching (cooperating with content
teachers). Watson Todd argues that whereas the first five are also found in
general English language teaching, the sixth, team teaching or cooperation
with content teachers, is distinctive to EAP.
The discussion of methodologies presented in the chapter is organized
around the concepts of input and output. These concepts are associated
with information processing views of second language acquisition as discussed in chapter 8. They will be familiar to most language teachers, and for
this reason, I have chosen them as a means of organizing the discussion.

I N PU T- B A SE D ST R AT EGI E S
Input based strategies rest on the idea that learning occurs primarily
through exposure to language input in the form of written or spoken texts

M E T HO D O L O G I E S

115

and language descriptions. Input is seen as a sine qua non of learning. Two
distinct subcategories of input-based strategies can be identified. The first
is premised on the idea that input is sufficient for learning and the second
on the idea that input needs to be followed by student output for learning
to occur.
Predominantly Input
Concepts
In this strategy, students are primarily provided with language input inasmuch as exposure to it is understood to promote learning. Learning comes
about as the students see evidence (sometimes also termed positive evidence)
of how language works or how language is used in workplace, academic, or
professional target environments. Students do not need to be pushed into
immediate production in order to learn.
The input strategy can be linked to ideas of language learning proposed by Krashen (1982), who argued that learners develop their linguistic
abilities in the absence of explicit instruction. Explicit instruction about
language and conscious study of language lead only to ‘learning.’ Learnt
knowledge functions as a monitor—learners use it to monitor their production of language. The ability to produce language, however, derives from
acquisition—unconscious and gradual development of language through
exposure to comprehensible input.
Teaching can simply provide positive evidence about how language works
or is used by exposing students to authentic texts and engaging them in
comprehension activities. Or teaching can go beyond this simple exposure
to language input and aim to help students notice specific language features
or forms in it through the use of awareness-raising activities (alternatively
termed consciousness-raising activities). Through the use of such activities,
teachers aim to direct students’ attention to the targeted forms or features
in the input so that the students will develop explicit knowledge of them.
There are a number of techniques for awareness raising, such as input
flooding (exposure to multiple samples of the feature) and input enhancement (the feature is highlighted in the text).
Heightened awareness of the forms or features by the students is understood to be beneficial. It is not expected that once students have become
aware of a linguistic item, they will immediately produce it, but rather that
repeated noticing will enhance learning. Acquisition, argues Tomlinson
(1998) ‘results from the gradual and dynamic process of internal generalization rather than from instant adjustments to the learner’s internal grammar’ (p. 16). It is important for learners to be reexposed to language items
in multiple samples over time. The use of reading and listening texts are one
way to achieve this. There can be a gap between learners’ understanding or

116

CHAPTER 9

becoming aware of a linguistic item and actually activating this knowledge
into some form of production.
Research
Classroom-based second language acquisition research has shown that
learners can acquire some linguistic features ‘incidentally’—thus showing
that instruction does not need to target these features as they can be learnt
from input in the environment (Lightbrown, 2000). Although it is now
generally agreed that learners do acquire language that was not the focus
of explicit teaching, there is less consensus about the extent to which this
is an unconscious process as originally hypothesized by Krashen (1982).
Research has shown that exposure to comprehensible input alone does not
lead to all types of learning equally. It is more likely to lead to the development of communicativeness and fluency than to gains in linguistic accuracy
(Ellis, Basturkmen, & Loewen, 2001).
Erlam (2003) reviews research studies that contrasted the effectiveness
of structured input-based instruction with output-based instruction. Structured input-based instruction was defined as instruction in which students
work with language input in the form of listening and reading tasks. The
tasks focus the students’ attention on a specific target form. The students
are required to notice the form and process its meaning. All the studies
reviewed showed that students who had received structured input-based
instruction performed as well on tests of comprehension and interpretation
as students who had received output-based instruction. More surprisingly,
a number of studies reviewed reported equivalent gains on tests of production for students who had received structured input-based instruction and
those who had received output-based instruction.
Applications
The following examples can be linked to input-based teaching. The
first example illustrates a teaching strategy based on the idea of implicit
knowledge acquisition through exposure alone and the second illustrates
consciousness-raising activities.
Example 1: Subject Specialist Texts for Comprehension. The ESP division
of the English Language Centre at Cukurova University, Turkey provides
English language instruction for students in their first and second years
of study in their departments in the university. The ESP courses focus on
the vocabulary of the students’ disciplines and how concepts and ideas are
expressed in them.
One commonly adopted lesson plan employed at the Centre involves the
use of subject specialist texts for comprehension activities. An authentic text
is chosen on the basis of topic and level. The topic of the text needs to be

M E T HO D O L O G I E S

117

relevant to learners’ specialist interests. For example, one ESP instructor
chose a text on the subject of religious festivals in different counties for her
ESP class composed of students studying theology. The text also needs to
be slightly above the students’ current level of comprehension. It should
contain some but not too many structures and vocabulary items that are not
well known to the students.
The text is given out for self-study in the first instance. Students read the
text and isolate the vocabulary items in the text that they do not know and
translate them into their first language.
In class the teacher leads a discussion (this is done in Turkish, which is
the first language of the teacher and students) on the meaning of segments
of the text the teacher preselects as ‘interesting’ from a content point of
view. During the discussions, the teacher periodically draws students’ attention to linguistic features of the input arising incidentally when engaged in
the discussion of meaning of the text.
Example 2: Awareness-Raising Activities. To illustrate awareness-raising
activities, I have chosen two lesson plans for EAP classes from a published
collection of teaching ideas (Master & Brinton, 1998). In both cases, the
lessons try to help students develop their ability to notice and become more
aware of language use and communication in their disciplines.
Listen Up (shown in Fig. 9.1) involves students observing and reflecting
on in situ university lectures. The aim is to raise students’ awareness of
aspects of nonverbal communication used in lectures. Instruction involves
using prerecorded videos of lectures and also getting students to go out into
the university environment.
Genre Files (shown in Fig. 9.2) involves students collecting documents
from their target environments and drawing students’ attention to genrerelated features in the input.
Input to Output
Concepts
In this strategy, students are provided with input as the basis for production (output). The lack of sufficient use of this strategy can be inferred in
the following criticism made of methodology in ESP: ‘A common failing in
teaching is to expect high level production without giving sufficient input’
(Scott & Scott, 1984, p. 217).
In instruction based on this strategy, the focus is on students acquiring
explicit knowledge of preselected language items. The teacher selects specific items (target linguistic forms or features) as the focus of instruction.
The items are presented or highlighted by the teacher. This is followed by

FIG. 9.1. Sample material: Listen Up! From Starks-Martin, 1998 (pp. 103–
105). Reprinted by permission.

118

M E T HO D O L O G I E S

119

some form of practice activity in which the students produce the items. The
input can take various forms such as a language description, analysis of a
genre, or teacher-led discussion of features in a text. The input provides accurate samples of how the language works and how it is used. The students
become aware of a gap between how they currently understand or use the
linguistic form or feature and the equivalent feature in target language use.
The teacher then requires the students to produce (output) the targeted
item(s), generally within the same lesson or the following lesson.
Research
White (1998) studied the acquisition of possessive determiners ‘his’ and
‘her’ with Francophone learners. The acquisition of this language feature
is known to be problematic because of differences between the English
and French rules for establishing the gender of third person singular (in
French, Robert voit sa mere, but in English, Robert sees his mother; pp.
86–87). White found that the learners who were exposed to ‘enhanced’
input (multiple samples of the targeted items that had been highlighted in
text-based input through bolding, underlining, or enlarging) were better
able to use them in oral production tasks than those who had not received
this enhanced input. Further experimental research by White, reported in
Lightbrown (2000), involved instruction that provided learners with explicit
information about the relationship between the possessive pronouns and
the nouns to which they attached. White found that the students who had
been provided with this type of instruction were able to use the possessive
determiners in more advanced ways in an oral production task than those
who had not.
Some research evidence supports the teaching of explicit knowledge
about genres as input for production work. Henry and Roseberry (1998)
report a study in which two groups of students were given classroom instruction using the same set of authentic texts. Students in Group A were given
explicit, form-focused instruction analyzing the organization of moves in
the genre of the tourist information texts. Instruction for students in Group
B involved reading the texts and meaning-focused activities (cloze exercises
and sentence joining). Following the instruction, the students were required to produce their own tourist information texts. Results showed that
students in Group A outperformed students in Group B on two measures
of success: ability to sequence information and ability to produce cohesive
text. Students in Group A were also reported to have higher levels of motivation toward the instruction than students in Group B.
Loewen and Basturkmen (2005) investigated whether students made
use of the genre-related information presented and highlighted in instruction in EAP writing instruction when they were later required to work in
small groups to coconstruct a sample text. In the first phase of instruction,

120

CHAPTER 9

FIG. 9.2. Sample material: Genre files. From Orr, 1998 (pp. 87–90).
Reprinted by permission.

the teacher focused the students’ attention on features and forms typically
used in writing a data commentary text. In the following phase of instruction a week later, the students, working in groups of three, were required
to write a data commentary text to support a chart and numerical data
about rent increases in a particular country. The researchers recorded the
discussions between the students working on the group task and identified
the episodes during the interaction in which students discussed specific
linguistic forms and features. The study showed that the students engaged
in more episodes focused on genre-related topics than on other linguistic

121

M E T HO D O L O G I E S

FIG. 9.2 (continued)

topics such as grammar, vocabulary, and features of written text in general.
The findings indicated that the students were able to make use of the type
of linguistic information that had been presented to them by the teacher, in
the first stage of instruction, in the production task in the second stage.
Applications
In ESP, the input-to-output option is used for teaching different aspects
of language, including genre knowledge. Badger and White (2000) describe
the practice of understanding (input) and applying rules (output) in the
practice of genre instruction in ESP: ‘Proponents of genre approaches are
not often explicit about their theory of learning. However, the use of model
texts and the idea of analysis suggest that learning is partly a question of
imitation and partly a matter of understanding and consciously applying
rules’ (p. 156).

122

CHAPTER 9

A number of criticisms have been made of the use of this option for
teaching genres. This option is often referred to as a ‘product approach’ to
teaching writing (Badger & White, 2000). Sengupta, Forey, and Hamp-Lyons
(1999) criticize instruction of genres based on a ‘show and tell approach’
and that leads to a prescription for how to do a genre. Berkenkotter and
Huckin (1993) argue that genre knowledge cannot be taught. It can only be
acquired as people become enculturated into specific disciplines.
The input-to-output strategy can be inferred from the following pieces
of instructional material. The first is a proposal for genre-based instruction
for an English for Engineering studies class and the second is for teaching
general English for Academic Purposes vocabulary.
Example 1: The Final Year Engineering Report. L. Flowerdew (2000, 2001)
reports on the method used to teach students who were writing final-year
engineering reports in a Hong Kong university. Flowerdew developed the
materials in line with the recommendations of Hopkins and Dudley-Evans
(1988), Kusel (1992), Dudley-Evans (1994), and Jacoby, Leech, and Holton
(1995). The first step in developing the materials was to collect a small corpus of successful final year reports from former students. The reports were
analysed for move sequence, use of graphics and visuals, and to identify the
relationship between sections (for example, the relationship between the
introduction and the results section).
The following stages and activities were used in teaching. The move sequence of the report was highlighted. Linguistic phrases used in the corpus
were highlighted with the aim of expanding the students’ own repertoire
of ways to express engineering concepts. A text was cut into sections and
the students reconstructed it. Sample texts were compared. The content
of moves and sections was highlighted. ‘Good models’ of students’ writing
were provided by the engineering faculty and these were discussed in the
EAP class. L. Flowerdew (2000) argues that good apprentice models offer
‘realistic, attainable models of academic writing’ (p. 369).
Example 2: Academic Vocabulary. Thursten and Candlin (1998) offer a
proposal for teaching general academic vocabulary. Instruction is based on
the use of concordances (see Fig. 9.3). The concordances involve vocabulary
items that research had shown to occur frequently in a corpus of academic
writing. Each lesson focuses on a set of vocabulary items. Concordances of
these items are used as the input in instruction. The concordances are used
in the following ways:
1. Students are presented with a concordance (multiple examples of a
vocabulary item used in context). Instruction leads the students to ‘notice’
how the word is used.

M E T HO D O L O G I E S

123

FIG. 9.3. Concordance on “identity.” Reprinted from English for Specific Purposes, Vol. 17, J. Thurstun and C. N. Candlin, “Concordancing and the teaching . . .” (p. 272). Copyright © 1998, with permission from Elsevier Science.

2. Students answer questions on the meaning and use of the items based
on their examination of the concordance input. For example, one exercise
requires students to notice the kind of objects that are ‘identified.’
3. Controlled practice and freer practice activities are provided so that
the students use the item in written production.

OU T PU T- B A SE D ST R AT EGI E S
Output-based instruction takes as its starting point students’ efforts to communicate in the target language. Two substrategies can be identified. The
first is based on the premise that using the language (producing output) is

124

CHAPTER 9

sufficient for learning and the second on the premise that it is only when
students’ production or output is followed by some form of input (discussion or highlighting of language) that learning occurs.
Predominantly Output
Concepts
In instruction based on a predominantly output strategy, students are
placed in situations that require them to perform production tasks (to
produce output) at the outset of a lesson or activity. The rationale is that
through producing language, students can identify where their interlanguage (developing language system) is sufficient for the performance or
production task and where it is not. Swain (1985, 1998) argues that in being
pushed to produce, language learners notice ‘holes’ in their linguistic
repertoire and this stimulates learning of language to fill in the holes. Thus
it is through being required to use language that one’s language develops
because while endeavouring to communicate through the language learners become aware of missing elements in their linguistic repertoire. This is
termed the the output hypothesis.
Ellis (1990, p. 117) identifies three key points in Swain’s argument for
the role of output in advancing levels of grammatical language accuracy:
• The need to produce output (‘pushed language use’) that is precise,
coherent, and appropriate during negotiation of meaning encourages the
learners to develop the necessary grammatical resources.
• During output, the learners can try out their hypotheses about language. Production, as opposed to comprehension, may force the learner to
move from semantic to syntactic processing. It is possible to comprehend a
message without any syntactic analysis of the input it contains.
• Production is the trigger that forces learners to pay attention to the
means of expression.
Research
Investigations of students in French immersion classes in Canada revealed that they often failed to develop their grammatical and sociolinguistic accuracy despite many years of plentiful exposure to input. Swain (1985)
argued that this failure was due to the fact that the students had received few
opportunities to produce language. Most of the interaction in the classes
had been teacher-led. Swain proposed that in addition to comprehensible
input, learners need to be pushed to use their language in communicative
situations. Teaching needs to provide learners with opportunities to use
whatever linguistic resources they have at their disposal.

M E T HO D O L O G I E S

125

A key idea in the output hypothesis is that learners develop a second
language when pushed to do so. Research provides some evidence for this
theory. Pica’s (1988) study, reported in Ellis (1990), showed that learners’
output became more grammatically accurate following exchanges in which
their interlocutor requested clarification from them compared to exchanges
in which the interlocutor simply requested confirmation. Having to clarify
what has been said calls for careful consideration of how to express and
encode a message. In a confirmation request, it is the interlocutor who must
consider and work out how to express the message or encode the idea. In
other words, the interaction showed that when the learners were pushed into
output by clarification requests, they improved their grammatical accuracy.
Not all production tasks, however, lead to the type of the interaction
needed for negotiation of meaning and pushed output. Seedhouse (1999)
examined the interaction of students working on convergent tasks (tasks
where students come together to agree on something) and found that the
students often made little use of explicit language and relied on minimal
responses and contributions because they had shared reference systems.
The tasks had not pushed the students to call on the range of linguistic
resources they had.
Applications
The idea of students being required to produce language is reflected
in many task-based activities for the classroom. In line with Willis (1990),
a task is understood to be ‘an activity that involves the use of language but
in which the focus is on the outcome of the activity rather than on the language used to achieve that outcome’ (p. 127). Tasks specify what students
will communicate about and action they will take but do not specify the
language that students will use or are expected to learn in the process of
doing the task (Ellis, 1998). Such activities do not set out to teach a preselection of linguistic items as it is recognised that any preselection of language
items to be taught is unlikely to match the learner’s internal syllabus. It is
claimed that tasks create the conditions for acquisition, such as negotiation
of meaning, and that doing tasks enables learners to develop the language
and skills in line with their own internal syllabuses (Ellis, 1998).
Task-based teaching has featured strongly in ESP in recent years and
is used often in combination with a ‘deep-end strategy’—student performance as the point of departure for the lesson and for which students may
or may not have been given preparation time (Dudley-Evans & St. John,
1998). Dudley Evans and St. John argue that a benefit of the strategy is that
it reflects the students’ target or professional, academic, or workplace world
where performance is the point of departure rather than preparation. In
ESP the use of deep-end strategy is associated with case study activities,
projects, presentations, role plays, and simulations.

126

CHAPTER 9

Two teaching activities are given next to illustrate the output option.
The first is a project (written production) and the second is a simulation
(spoken production).
Example 1: E-Commerce Web Page Project. Crookes (2001) reports a
project used for teaching English for Business Purposes in Australia. The
project calls for the students to set up an e-commerce web page for small
businesses in the local community. The students carry out this project
during the final weeks of the program. The students are young adults with
good computer skills.
The project involved the following steps:
• The class examined commercial Internet sites.
• Students discussed web page design techniques in class.
• The task was given. The task was to advertise a local business with a
3-page linked Web site.
• Out-of-class pairs of students met with a local business owner to find
out the goods/services the business owner would like advertised on
the web.
• Back in the ESP class, the pairs prepared the Web-site advertisement.
In this task the students were required to create an advertisement that
accurately conveyed information about the business (pushed output). The
output emerged during a process of negotiation of meaning—first in
terms of negotiated content with the business owners and second as the
pairs negotiated the language needed to convey the information about the
business.
Example 2: Workplace Project Team Meeting Simulation. This task involves
a simulation of a workplace meeting (see Fig. 9.4). The students are required to find a solution to a problem and present the solution in the form
of a flowchart. There is no preselected linguistic input, and students can
make use of any linguistic resources they have at their disposal. The impetus
for pushed output comes in Steps 9 and 10. Both steps push students to
report accurately on concepts and ideas. Step 10 requires students to make
clarifications (a force for pushed input suggested by the research findings
of Pica, 1988).
Output to Input
Concepts
In instruction based on an output-to-input strategy, students’ production
(output) is followed by feedback. Students perform a task and feedback

M E T HO D O L O G I E S

127

is provided to show a more native-like performance. The aim is that the
students notice how their own output differs from the more native-like
model. The feedback stage may be followed by a further optional stage in
which students reperform the task.
During task production, students notice ‘holes’ in their linguistic repertoire or resources, thus creating the metacognitive state necessary for input.
Learners may notice that they cannot say what they want to say precisely
in the target language—‘noticing a hole in one’s inter-language’ (Swain,
1998, p. 66). It is thought that provision of input in advance of students’
themselves recognizing a need for it is similar to expecting someone to be
interested in filling a crack in the plaster work on the wall before they have
perceived that there is a gap to be filled.
This strategy does not involve a focus on prespecified linguistic items. No
particular language forms are targeted for instruction, although a general
area may be (for example, how to make requests, doing a business proposal). Feedback may be given on any number of language items. Teachers
may collect examples of errors or interesting aspects of language use that
arose during the production stage. These are to give feedback to the whole
class or to individual students, pairs, and groups.
In an output-to-input strategy, the learning activity or task functions
to create the conditions for students to ‘notice a hole’ in their linguistic
repertoire and produce ‘data’ for feedback. Activities in the input stage
provide opportunities for students to notice the gap by comparing their
output with more native-like performance. Once they have noticed the gap,
they are psychologically ready for information provided in feedback (the
input stage) because they have experienced difficulty, recognized a hole in
their linguistic repertoire, and thus have sharpened attention to the input
provided.
Applications
The output–input option is illustrated with reference to two pieces of
teaching material for teaching academic speaking.
Example 1: Promoting Pragmatic Awareness and Spoken Discourse With EAP
Classes by Clennell (1999). The material focuses on understanding and
interpreting spoken discourse. The following teaching procedure was used:
The first stage requires students to produce output. Students working in
pairs choose a topic and develop an interview protocol to use to interview
native speakers on the campus. They conduct and record a number of
interviews. The students transcribe one of the interviews and present their
transcription and analysis of events in it to the class.
The second stage provides opportunities for input or feedback to students on their performance of the task. To present their work, the pairs

128

CHAPTER 9

FIG. 9.4. Sample material: Minds meeting. From Clerehan and Croslin,
1998 (pp. 239–241). Reprinted by permission.

replay the recording and talk through their transcription and analysis of
events. Peers and the teacher offer suggestions and can disagree with the
deciphering and the analysis of events as presented. In Clennell’s class,
students in the audience point out language items and features that eluded
or confused the interviewers. For example, one pair of students transcribed,
‘It’s pretty shocking what happen er I mean. . . .’ Students in the audience
identified what was actually said as, ‘It’s pretty shocking what happened
there, I mean . . .’
Example 2: Discourse in Seminars and Questions. In this material the production (output) stage requires students to predict and write down questions they would be asked following a presentation. They are also required

FIG. 9.4 (continued)

129

130

FIG. 9.5. Discourse in seminars and questions. Reprinted from English for Specific Purposes, Vol.
18, H. Basturkmen, “Discourse in MBA Seminars” (p. 73), Copyright © 1999, with permission
from Elsevier Science.

M E T HO D O L O G I E S

131

to predict how they would respond to any difficult questions. Following this,
students are provided with input (transcribed talk of seminar discussion),
and they are led to notice how difficult questions were dealt with in the
transcript. This provides an opportunity for the students to compare their
own language production (their notes on language use) with a more nativelike version. (See Fig. 9.5).

SU M M A RY
The discussion of methodologies in ESP in this chapter was organized
around four macrostrategies for teaching: predominantly input; input to
output; predominantly output; and output to input. Two of these strategies were input-based. The first (predominantly input) was linked to the
idea that learning occurs through students being exposed to samples of
language use. The second (input to output) was linked to the idea that
learners need first notice language forms and features and then use them in
their own production. The teacher (or course designer) selects which items
are to be presented for students to notice and thus learn.
Two output-based strategies were described. Predominantly output was
linked to the idea that learning occurs through students struggling to
communicate and being pushed to reach their linguistic ceilings. The
output-to-input strategy was associated with the idea that learners are ready
to acquire new language when they have experienced a hole (a lacuna) in
their linguistic repertoire and are offered a solution to that problem in the
form of feedback.

QU E ST IONS FOR DI SCUS SION A N D PROJ EC T S
1. What role do the four macrostrategies described in this chapter play in
your own teaching? Do you tend to use any of the strategies more than
others?
2. Is a deep-end strategy suitable and desirable in the ESP class you currently teach or the type of class you are likely to teach in the future?
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of this strategy.
3. L. Flowerdew (2000, 2001) called on the engineering faculty at her
university to provide samples of ‘good’ student writing that she used
in teaching report writing. In teaching ESP or EAP, have you called on
subject specialists to provide input for instruction or feedback on student
production? If so, how?
4. What use of project work and case method studies do you make in your
ESP teaching? In groups, draw up a list of the advantages and drawbacks

132

CHAPTER 9

of these activities and discuss ways you would deal with any difficulties
that may emerge.
5. In groups, discuss whether choice of teaching strategy is largely contextdependant or a matter of personal preference? Are teachers more likely
to opt mainly for an output-based strategy because they have classes of
mature and postexperienced ESP learners or because they espouse the
concepts associated with output-based teaching?

F U RT H E R R E A DI NG
• In the introduction to an edited volume on materials development in
language teaching, Tomlinson (1998) discusses links between second
language acquisition research and materials development.
• Watson Todd (2003) argues that the topic of methodology has been
neglected in the literature on EAP and discusses whether EAP has a
distinctive methodology.
• The introduction to Erlam’s (2003) article offers a useful overview of the
range of input- or output-based instructional activities.
• Ellis (2003) provides an in-depth examination of the relationship between
task-based teaching and research on second language acquisition.
• Esteban and Canado (2004) review the use of case studies in ESP and
identify some of the drawbacks associated with this technique. The writers show a practical example of using a case study in teaching English
to postgraduate students of foreign trade and how they dealt with the
difficulties involved.

Chapter

10

Objectives in Teaching ESP

This chapter examines broad objectives in teaching ESP. The chapter
describes five objectives:
•
•
•
•
•

To reveal subject-specific language use.
To develop target performance competencies.
To teach underlying knowledge.
To develop strategic competence.
To foster critical awareness.

The chapter also reviews the sociopolitical issues emerging in the ESP
literature in recent years. Until recently, it had been commonly assumed
that ESP teaching was a benign and neutral operation that simply set out to
help nonnative speakers of English cope with language demands in their
target environments. This assumption has now been questioned and calls
have been made for a critical approach to ESP teaching.
In the chapter, reference is made to Stern’s (1989, 1992) categorization of
language education objectives. Stern distinguished four types of objectives:
proficiency, knowledge, affective, and transfer. Proficiency objectives concern
mastery of skills such as reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Knowledge
objectives concern the acquisition of linguistic and cultural information.
Linguistic knowledge objectives include language analysis and awareness of
the systematic aspects of language. Cultural knowledge objectives include
control of sociocultural rules (mastery of the norms of society, values, and
orientations) and also the ability to recognise culturally significant facts,
knowing what is acceptable and what is not. Affective objectives concern
the development of positive feelings toward the subject of study. They
include attitudes toward attaining second language competence, sociocultural competence, and language learning. Transfer objectives concern the
ability to generalise from what has been learnt in one situation to other
situations.
133

134

C H A P T E R 10

The following sections describe the five broad objectives in ESP teaching
listed in the opening paragraph. Some ESP teachers reading this chapter
will find that their teaching is oriented closely to one or two of the objectives
described in the following pages. Others might find that all five objectives
are important in their teaching. The organization of the sections differs
slightly from that followed in previous chapters, with research and applications examined concurrently rather than consecutively.

TO R E V E A L SU BJ EC T- SPEC I F IC
L A NGUAGE USE
Concepts
Historically, the objective of teaching content about subject-specific language use has dominated ESP. This objective is linked to the linguistic
knowledge objective and, to a lesser extent, the cultural knowledge objective in Stern’s categorisation (1992). Teaching oriented to this objective
aims to show how English is used in the target environment and to impart
to students the knowledge about it that has been revealed by linguistic
research in the field. There is a direct link between research and pedagogy,
with teaching primarily focused on demonstrating the forms and features
that descriptive linguistic research has brought to light.
Research and Applications
The idea that ESP teaching should be first and foremost concerned with
demonstration of findings from linguistic research in specific-purpose language use can be seen in the recommendations made by Bhatia (1982).
Bhatia made an in-depth linguistic analysis of the language of ‘qualification’
in legal texts. Following this, Bhatia offers a number of suggestions for
teaching English to students of law. Teachers are advised to discuss the
organization of texts with the students, to highlight the structure of the
texts, and demonstrate the language of qualification in legal writing. Bhatia
does not propose that research findings are simply presented in teaching,
however. He recommends that teachers need to simplify example texts so
that the structures used in legislative writing can be made more transparent
to the learners.
The objective of revealing specific-purpose language use is intuitively
appealing, but what might the potential drawbacks be of teaching and
learning based on descriptions of specific-purpose language use? Wharton
(1999) reviews research into the difficulties experienced in learning genres.
Wharton’s findings show that teaching and learning a genre involves far

O B J E C T I V E S I N T E AC H I N G E S P

135

more than transmission of linguistic information. Her findings include the
following points:
• Learners find academic and professional genre acquisition difficult
because it necessitates not only development of conceptual understanding
of the surface discourse but also of a set of socially valued norms and thus
new frameworks of reasoning.
• Learning genres tends to be mastered late even in one’s first language.
• It is difficult for teachers to communicate the nature of a genre to
those who are unfamiliar with it.
Nearly two decades ago, in a discussion of teaching English for Science,
Swales (1985) noted that ESP needed to go beyond simply revealing the
truth about the language of science. He argued that ESP teaching needed
to do more than ‘simply import into the ESP classroom examples and
practice work that reflected the grammatical, lexical, rhetorical and textual
features of text types’ (p. 174). The objectives described in the following
sections represent four different orientations to teaching ESP, orientations
that aim to do more than reveal subject-specific language use.

TO DE V E LOP TA RGET PE R FOR M A NC E
COM PET E NC I E S
Concepts
Competency-based occupational education can be described as an approach focused on developing the ability to perform the activities of an
occupation and function to the standards expected of those employed in
that occupation (Funnel & Owen, 1992). In language education, teaching
oriented toward this objective presents language operationally in terms of
what people do with language and the skills they need to do it. Courses are
organized around core skills and competencies that are also subdivided into
microskills and more specific competencies. This orientation can be categorized as a proficiency objective, according to Stern’s classification (1992).
The link between needs analysis and teaching to develop target performance competencies is straightforward. Needs analysis reveals the demands
and expectations of the target environment, and ESP teaching sets out to
help students meet those demands to the level of competency expected.
For example, a hypothetical needs analysis reveals that one of the competencies needed by medical practitioners is the ability to ask questions to
elicit personal medical histories from patients. An ESP course devised for

136

C H A P T E R 10

overseas-trained doctors might specify this competency as a course objective: ‘by the end of the course students should be able to ask questions in
English to elicit medical histories in clinical settings.’
One early proposal for ESP teaching oriented directly toward the demands of the target environment was the Communicative Needs Processor proposed by Munby (1978). Munby suggested that courses could be
developed around the communicative events in which ESP students would
be engaged in their target environment. Needs analysis was used to identify
communicative events occurring routinely in the target workplace and the
speech acts they involved. A list of language exponents and formulaic expressions for the speech acts was created. The inventory of communicative
events, speech acts, and language exponents became a specification for ESP
course content. One drawback of this proposal was that it failed to take into
account the fact that encounters in real life situations are often unpredictable and events develop in surprising ways. Only a few occupations, such as
air traffic control, operate largely around highly regulated communicative
procedures and a restricted language repertoire.
Research and Applications
The emphasis on performance competencies has been particularly common
in workplace ESP training, English for highly specific situations, and ‘shot
in the arm’ projects of limited duration. The following example illustrates
a ‘shot in the arm’ ESP project in the Middle East based on training target
situation performance competencies.
Ball (1994) reports an ESP project developed by the British Council for
bank tellers in an Arabic-speaking country. The 3-day ESP course was part
of a month-long training program for bank tellers with good knowledge of
banking procedures including currency transfers. The ESP course aimed
to provide the tellers with English language skills to be able to process currency transfers for non-Arabic-speaking customers. The course targeted two
key functions for the bank tellers: to elicit information from the customer
in English and to issue a foreign currency draft in English.
Teaching was based around the currency transfer form used in the
bank. Instruction involved activities such as eliciting questions used when
completing the form (What is the beneficiary’s bank? How much do you
want to transfer?). It also involved role-plays between bank tellers and
customers. The role-plays were videoed and feedback provided by the
teachers on aspects of the students’ language use, such as grammar, vocabulary, and choice of politeness formula. The trainees were assessed on
their ability to perform the two key functions in English and were judged
on this by an expatriate employee of the bank. The criterion the expatriate
employee used for assessment was: ‘If you were doing a currency trans-

O B J E C T I V E S I N T E AC H I N G E S P

137

action, would this trainee be able to serve you effectively and efficiently in
English?’

TO T E AC H U N DE R LY I NG K NOW L E DGE
Concepts
Using a second or foreign language for workplace or study purposes requires not only linguistic proficiency and knowledge but also knowledge
and understanding of work-related and disciplinary concepts. According to
Douglas (2000), specific-purpose language ability results from interaction
between specific-purpose background knowledge and language ability. ESP
teaching with preexperienced students (students with limited familiarity
with their target workplaces and disciplines) may set out to teach specific
purpose background knowledge. The term underlying competencies in ESP
was used by Hutchinson and Waters (1985) to refer to disciplinary concepts
from the students’ field of study. They argued that ESP should focus on
developing students’ knowledge of these disciplinary concepts as well as
their language skills. The objective of teaching underlying knowledge can
be classified as a cultural knowledge objective, according to Stern’s categorization (1992).
Recent proposals have been made for ESP teaching to familiarize students with ways of thinking in their target situations. Hirvela (1997) argues
that conventional ESP teaching that has focused on teaching specificpurpose language use and genres has provided information about the
surface properties of disciplinary language and rhetoric. However, it has
failed to provide necessary information about the ‘invisible discourse’ (p.
216) of discourse communities—the ways of thinking and frames of reference. These elements are not on the surface of the discourse, but they are
essential for producing and understanding it.
The field of professional education recognises the need to introduce
learners to ways of thinking. Dinham and Stritter (1986) describe professional education as bringing about a ‘change of gestalt that marks the
metamorphosis from novice to professional . . . transforming the students’
gestalt from confusion to familiarity, so that the student comes to inhabit
the professional world’ (p. 953).
Research and Applications
Gimenez (2001) reports a cross-cultural study of business negotiation strategies. The study focused on the strategies of negotiators from a range
of countries negotiating with an import–export company in the United

138

C H A P T E R 10

Kingdom. The study showed that the negotiations opened with a move
termed establishing the credentials. In this move, buyers concentrated on
their company’s current assets and buying power, and sellers concentrated
on their company’s fixed assets and selling power. However, cross-cultural
differences emerged in the strategies buyers and sellers from different
cultures used in approaching issues. For example, the Iranian negotiator
used the approach of ‘extra benefits’ as a way of compensating for what
the seller did not have, a strategy not used by negotiators from different
cultures. The results led Gimenez to make two proposals for teaching negotiations in English for Business Purposes courses. First, teaching should
incorporate an exploration of the status-bound behavior of negotiators
(whether buyer or sellers). Second, students should be required to roleplay negotiations and teachers should use the role-plays as a basis for
discussion on cultural differences in strategy choice. These proposals are
examples of ESP teaching with a focus on teaching conceptual and cultural
knowledge.
Hutchinson and Waters (1985) proposed that the ESP classroom was the
appropriate place to introduce students to concepts from their disciplines
in addition to the language the students would need to express those
concepts. They were led to make this proposal partly by their own teaching
situation. They taught ESP courses in the United Kingdom to overseas students. The courses aimed to prepare the students for study in technical colleges in the United Kingdom. Hutchinson and Waters argued that in such
cases, ESP teaching needed to play a role in providing the students with
background knowledge, termed underlying competency. This meant teaching
general conceptual subject content alongside language. In Hutchinson and
Waters’s situation this meant, for example, teaching engineering students
about pump systems while teaching language use for describing systems
and processes.

TO DE V E LOP ST R AT EGIC COM PET E NC E
Concepts
Discussions of strategic competence have appeared in definitions of language ability in the language-testing literature. Douglas (2000) proposes a
three-part model of specific-purpose language ability comprising language
knowledge (grammatical, textual, functional, and sociolinguistic), background knowledge, and strategic competence (assessment of the external
context and engaging a discourse domain). Douglas argues that strategic
competence acts as a ‘mediator’ between the external situational context
and the internal language and background knowledge that is needed to

O B J E C T I V E S I N T E AC H I N G E S P

139

respond to the communicative situation (p. 38). Strategic competence is
the link between context of situation and language knowledge and can
be defined as the means that enables language knowledge and content
knowledge to be used in communication.
Teaching oriented toward the development of strategic competence
aims to recognise and work from the preexisting knowledge base of the
student:
The ESP teacher, for the most part, does not in any straightforward sense conform to the image of a ‘knower.’ It is true that he or she possesses specialist
knowledge of the target language which the learner is interested in acquiring;
he or she may be fortunate enough to possess some familiarity with the subject matter relevant to the learner’s area of study or concentration. It is more
likely, however . . . that the learner will possess far more knowledge in depth
in his or her own specialist field than the teacher. (Early, 1981, p. 85)

Teaching ESP to students who have workplace and professional experience or who have experience in study in their disciplines may aim to
develop the students’ strategic competence. The intent is to bring to the
surface the knowledge of the subject area that the students already have and
to create opportunities for the students to actualize this knowledge in the
target language (in this case, English).
In the ESP literature, Dudley-Evans and St. John (1998) maintain that
ESP learners bring to language learning knowledge of their own specialist
field and communication in it. Although this knowledge may be conscious,
it is often latent (implicit or tacit knowledge) and thus learners will not be
able to control the use of that knowledge. Therefore, ‘the ESP teacher’s job
may be to develop a more conscious awareness so that control is gained’
(p. 188). Teaching with this focus can be categorized as having a linguistic
knowledge objective, according to Stern’s classification (1992).
Research and Applications
In working with postgraduate students from highly specialised fields, the
EAP unit at Birmingham University developed a team teaching approach
(Dudley-Evans & St. John, 1998). Their aim was to avoid situations in which
‘the EAP teacher . . . with a smattering of knowledge in the subject area,
and a view of himself as an expert on communication . . . comes to regard
himself as an expert —or the expert—on how the subject ought to be
taught, and even what the subject ought to be ‘ (p. 152). The approach
involved three parties in teaching: the EAP teacher, the subject specialist,
and the students. The role of the teacher was to be a mediator between the
language and subject knowledge by providing language needed to express
the content.

140

C H A P T E R 10

The following sequence shows an example sequence of instruction.
Before the team teaching session:
The subject specialist records a lecture. In this case the subject
specialist is a lecturer in highway engineering. The EAP teacher
devises a worksheet of questions on the lecture content. The student or students write their responses to the questions.
The team teaching session:
A team-taught session is held in which the student(s), the lecturer
of highway engineering and the EAP teacher are present. The
session focuses on the responses of the student(s) to items on
the worksheet items. The subject specialist gives information as
needed on points of content and the language teacher helps with
any language points arising.
A number of advantages are given for team teaching:
• The student(s) have immediate assistance with any difficulties as
they arise.
• Subject specialists find out how effectively they communicate to
the students.
• The EAP teacher gains familiarity with the conceptual matter of
the subject and how language is used to represent it.
• The EAP teacher understands where linguistic difficulties arise
in relation to conceptual matter. ( Johns & Dudley-Evans, 1985,
p. 141).

TO FOST E R C R I T IC A L AWA R E N E S S
Concepts
Teaching objectives listed in the previous sections are based on a common
understanding that the role of ESP is to help students fit into their target
academic, professional, or workplace environments. Despite differences
among the objectives, all have the overriding goal of enabling students to
become accepted members of those target environments, and all have a
shared understanding that ESP can best help students attain this end by
helping them develop the skills and knowledge they need to produce acceptable language in those environments. Thus conventionally the role of
ESP has been construed in terms of helping English language learners meet
the demands and expectations of the target environment, to close the gap
between the students’ present state of skills and knowledge and the level
required by members of the target environment. This taken-for-granted

O B J E C T I V E S I N T E AC H I N G E S P

141

understanding has recently come to be challenged and a critical approach
proposed in its place. See Hyland and Hamp-Lyons (2002) and Basturkmen
and Elder (2004) for overviews of the literature relating to conventional
views about the role of EAP and ESP and emerging critical approaches.
A critical approach to ESP questions whether the function of ESP teaching should be exclusively on helping students fit into target situations by
teaching them the language, behaviors, or knowledge to act appropriately.
Proponents of a critical approach (Benesch, 2001; Pennycook, 1997) challenge the idea that teaching should promote the communicative norms of
the target environment and lead students to accept these norms uncritically. Hyland and Hamp-Lyons (2002) report, as a central issue for EAP, the
question of whether it is ‘the EAP teacher’s job to replicate and reproduce
existing forms of discourse (and thus power relations) or to develop an
understanding of them so that they can be challenged?’ (p. 9).
ESP has most often been seen as a pragmatic venture that helps students
become familiar with established communicative practices (Allison, 1996,
1998). Benesch (1996) describes critical approaches as a reaction to the
pragmatic ESP/EAP perspective that ‘changing existing forms is unrealistic
whereas promoting them is practical’ (p. 736). A critical orientation of ESP
has led to the accusation that ESP has been a force for accommodation and
conservatism (modifying students to suit established norms in the target
environment and maintaining the status quo of those environments). By
seeking to prepare non-native speaker students for target discourse communities, ESP may have inadvertently endorsed practices and norms of target
environments. Thus, ESP may be in part responsible for the maintenance of
norms and practices not all of which are necessarily desirable.
Instruction with the aim of raising students’ critical awareness would
involve discussing with students how norms and communicative practices in
the target environments become established, encouraging students to critique any negative aspects, and making them aware of ways to try to change
or modify the situation so as to position themselves better in relation to it. It
can be argued that unless teachers raise students’ awareness of the negative
aspects, they may be choosing compliance for them. This objective can be
linked to the cultural knowledge and affective objectives in Stern’s (1992)
classification. It may be considered an affective objective because teaching
seeks to change the way the students feel about themselves and to improve
their perceptions of their status in relation to members of target environments and discourse communities.
A potential drawback of leading ESP students to critique the established
practices and status quo is that this might result in a situation where doors
will be closed to the students. Opponents of critical approaches argue
that critical approaches may ‘deny students access to the language and
discourses they need’ (Pennycook, 1997b, p. 265). Pennycook and other

142

C H A P T E R 10

proponents of critical approaches argue that this is not the case. Leading
students to critique established practices helps them modify the practices
to better suit their needs and thus this opens up doors to them, making
it easier for them to function in or gain access to their chosen target
environments.
Writing on applied linguistics generally, Fairclough (1992) critiques
the notion of teaching appropriate language use for two reasons. First, it
implies the existence of a culturally homogeneous speech community. In
fact, real speech communities, Fairclough argues, demonstrate cultural
heterogeneity. Second, it promotes normativity and training. In place of
teaching appropriate language use, language education should try to help
learners develop critical language awareness. The advantage of such awareness is that learners will be positioned to choose which language practices
they wish to engage in and which they wish to modify or reject:
Critical language awareness . . . should not push learners into oppositional
practices which condemn them to disadvantage and marginalisation; it should
equip them with the capacities and understanding which are preconditions
for meaningful choice and effective citizenship in the domain of language.
(Fairclough, 1992, p. 54).

In a discussion of EAP, Coleman (1996) draws attention to the distinction
between autonomous and ideological functions of language education.
An autonomous view assumes that education has the same function or set
of functions in every society, that there is one possible set of behaviors appropriate for all systems of higher educations that can be used to evaluate
the adequacy of any educational enterprise. An ideological view assumes
that the functions are culturally embedded. Each society or culture creates
its own function and there are no ‘universally relevant roles’ (p. 2). The
function or set of functions differs according to societies. Coleman critiques
EAP for conventionally adhering to an autonomous view in which teaching
has tended to assume the ubiquity of patterns, skills, and procedures. When
EAP course participants (students and academics from other parts of the
world) are found not to share these, EAP has tended to fault the participants for thinking in ‘illogical,’ ‘vague,’ and ‘unclear ways’ and failing to
give regards to diverse ways of thinking (p. 8).
The emergence of critical perspectives has led to discussion in the world
of ESP. This is illustrated in the debate about EAP between Allison and
Pennycook that appeared in English for Specific Purposes Journal (Allison,
1996, 1998; Pennycook, 1997b). Allison (1996) argued that the role of EAP
had always been and should continue to be essentially pragmatic. Pennycook (1997b) challenged the conventional role of EAP and accused EAP
of ‘vulgar’ pragmaticism in that it had focused almost exclusively on the
everyday concerns of developing courses and materials and needs analysis.

O B J E C T I V E S I N T E AC H I N G E S P

143

EAP, argued Pennycook, had failed to make ethical or aesthetic choices and
distinguish between good and bad communicative practices in target environments. It had uncritically accepted the communicative practices as the
objective facts of the situation. Pennycook accused EAP of being conformist and assuming a conservative attitude toward the dominant academic
system. In effect, it had played a role in upholding the status of dominant
academic in-groups. EAP needed to look beyond the everyday concerns
of course preparation and needs analysis (how questions) and ask broader
political and cultural questions, such as what should be done and why
(what and why questions). It needed to consider social and political issues
and no longer uncritically accept the existing states of affairs, implicit or
explicit standards, conventions, norms, rules, and communicative practices
of academia. EAP needed to reexamine its view of science and technology
as a neutral supracultural entity transcending local contexts and consider
whose version of science and technology was being offered to students. It
needed to reexamine the role of EAP teaching and move away from seeing
English classes as mere adjuncts to disciplinary subjects and toward making
English classes sites for change and resistance.
Research and Applications
EAP studies have set out to investigate diverse ways of thinking in the attempt to move away from ‘autonomous’ views of academic values. Jin and
Cortezzi (1996) investigated the understandings of Chinese postgraduate
students in the United Kingdom of academic work. Bloor and Bloor (1991)
investigated the writing problems of non-native speaker students in an
academic writing program in a U.K. university in relation to norms in the
students’ home cultures. Cadman (1997) explored the difficulties faced by
a small group of international students writing humanities and arts theses
in an Australian university. Cadman traced the way the students positioned
themselves in relation to the claims they made. She found links between
the positioning the students took and the identity of ‘the student’ in their
home cultures.
Benesch (1996) reports on her implementation of critical needs analysis
and rights analysis in a paired ESL writing/psychology class in the United
States. Benesch argues the need for EAP to have a dual focus—the conventional focus of helping students develop linguistic skills for academic work
and a new focus on helping students develop linguistic, social, and cultural
critical awareness. Benesch critiques conventional needs analysis in ESP for
having been concerned only to identify the elements in the target situation
as the basis of curriculum development and for being biased toward institutional, in-group wishes. Needs analysis, she argues, has falsely purported
to be neutral and to be simply providing objective taxonomies of necessary

144

C H A P T E R 10

skills. In fact, these taxonomies of needs have a hidden ideological basis (the
representation of institutional wants). Benesch’s needs analysis differed
from conventional analyses. It focused on the students’ perspectives of
needs and was used to explore options for transforming the target situation:
‘Critical needs analysis assumes that institutions are hierarchial and that
those at the bottom are often entitled to more power than they have. It seeks
areas where greater equality might be achieved’ (Benesch, 1996, p. 736).
Benesch’s study revealed that the students found the amount of reading
required in one of their psychology papers unmanageable. This led Benesch
to provide conventional EAP support in the form of classroom reading skills
activities and to try to improve the situation by arranging for the psychology
professor to visit the EAP class for a discussion on one of the topics covered
in the psychology curriculum. In addition, Benesch attempted to raise the
students’ social awareness and transform their perceptions of themselves.
At the time, elections for governor of New York were being held. Benesch
used this opportunity to have the students in her EAP class to write letters
to the candidates. In the letters, the students questioned proposals for
cutting educational funding, proposals that would directly affect them. In
these ways, the EAP course was used to involve the students in political and
social processes.
A second study by Benesch (1999) aimed to identify how the students in
the paired ESL writing/psychology class asserted their rights in relation to
the requirements of a psychology course. Benesch observed the interaction
in the psychology lectures. She noted the ways the students resisted the
unilateral power of the psychology professor with questions and complaints
(such as the speed of the psychology lectures and the lack of reading assignments), and with silence. With the aim of getting the students to act more
constructively, Benesch had students in the EAP class write to the professor
proposing changes. She thus used EAP teaching to create a means by which
the students could modify the situation they faced. Benesch (1999) wrote:
I believe EAP can help students fulfil certain academic expectations while
challenging others. . . . Needs analysis reveals institutional requirements and
expectations; rights analysis reveals possibilities for change. The starting point
for EAP can be the institutional requirements but a vision of student engagement can provide the momentum for change. This dual focus of compliance
and resistance allows students to choose which aspects they want to accept
and which they might challenge. (p. 326)

SU M M A RY
This chapter examined a range of objectives in ESP teaching. ESP courses
are often based on different combinations of objectives, with some courses

O B J E C T I V E S I N T E AC H I N G E S P

145

giving more emphasis to some objectives than others. This may reflect the
outlook of the teachers, course designers, and institutions involved.
Examination of objectives for teaching ESP led to discussion of what is
the legitimate business of ESP. Until very recently, it was taken for granted
that ESP was an essentially pragmatic endeavor focused on helping students
enter their chosen target workplace, professional, or academic environments. The task of ESP was construed as investigating these environments
and analyzing students’ needs in relation to them. It was assumed that the
demands of the target environment were fixed, and these were represented
as the facts of the matter. The role of ESP was to help students meet these
demands. However, this conventional outlook on ESP has been challenged.
Those advocating a critical role for ESP teaching wish to offer a different
type of help. They argue that the demands of the target environment can
and sometimes should be adapted to better meet the needs of nonnative
speaker would-be members. ESP teaching should work to encourage these
would-be members to change the target situation to better suit their needs.
Thus ESP teaching should help students realise that target demands may
be up for negotiation and that they have a role to play in taking action to
help this come about.

QU E ST IONS FOR DI SCUS SION A N D PROJ EC T S
1. Examine the statement of aims and objectives for two ESP or EAP
courses targeting similar students. How comparable are the courses in
their teaching objectives?
2. What role do the teaching objectives described in this chapter play in
your own teaching? Are some objectives more important than others?
3. Widdowson (1983) critiqued ESP teaching for being a form of training
in performance behaviors rather than language education. Widdowson
made the following comparisons between general ELT and ESP:
a. General ELT distinguishes between teaching aims (the eventual
target behaviors of the students) and objectives (the pedagogical means
hoped to enable the students to achieve the eventual target behaviors).
By contrast, ESP conflates aims and objectives, with the result that
courses simply specify where the learner should end up rather than
working out the pedagogical means to achieve those ends.
b. General ELT aims to provide students with a general language
capacity. In doing so, it provides the students with the enabling strategies
and means to solve independently communication difficulties (often unpredictable in nature) that they will face after completing the language
course. By contrast, ESP courses often aim to provide students with a
restricted set of language competencies (just enough to function in the

146

C H A P T E R 10

target environment). This fails to provide a general language capacity that would allow the students to solve unpredicted communication
problems in the future.
Discuss whether you agree with these comparisons and the notion that
ESP can be a form of training rather than language education.
4. The English for Bank Tellers course described earlier was an example of
a course oriented to developing performance competencies. It involved
students with existing background knowledge and operational skills of
bank telling. Do you agree that attempts by ESP to teach language for
performance competencies may be fruitless if the background knowledge is missing?
5. The objective of teaching underlying competencies implies that the
ESP teacher has some knowledge of concepts or culture in the target
workplace, professional, or academic environments. It also implies that
the ESP teacher is able to teach this kind of knowledge and can do so
alongside language teaching. In which circumstances might this be
true? In which areas of ESP or EAP would you feel competent to teach
disciplinary concepts or cultural content as well as language?
6. To what extent have critical approaches influenced your own teaching
situation? Do you consider critical approaches to ESP to be desirable?

F U RT H E R R E A DI NG
• Waters and Waters (2001) argue that EAP can usefully teach ‘study
competence’ (cognitive and affective capacity for study) as well as study
skills.
• Dudley-Evans (2001) discusses the role of the EAP teacher in team teaching with subject specialists.
• Ferguson (1997) explores the role of subject-specialist knowledge in ESP
teaching and ESP teacher education.
• Douglas (2000) provides an in-depth discussion of the role of background
knowledge and strategic competence in assessment of specific-purposes
language ability.
• Pennycook (2003) provides an overview of critical approaches in Applied
Linguistics.
• Benesch (1996, 1999) argues for a critical approach to EAP and describes
how she implemented this approach in her own teaching situation.
• Harwood and Hadley (2004) compare the objectives of critical and pragmatic approaches to the teaching of academic writing.

III
GENER A L

This page intentionally left blank

Chapter

11

Synthesis

The previous chapters of this book focused on different aspects of the
framework for analysis of ESP introduced in chapter 2. This chapter brings
together these aspects and presents the complete framework. A further aim
is to demonstrate an analysis of two ESP teaching projects (an on-site English for workplace needs course in the Middle East and a university-based
EAP course in United Kingdom) using the framework.

R E I N T RODUC I NG T H E F R A M E WOR K
The opening chapters of this book argued the need for a framework for
analysis of ESP. The argument was based on the observation that much of
the literature in ESP has described language use in specific disciplines or
work areas, or reported particular teaching projects. It was argued that a
framework for analysis of the various ideas and options in ESP was needed.
It would allow various ESP teaching and research projects to be compared.
In the chapters of the book, various components of the framework have
been described and illustrated. Figure 11.1 shows these components, complete with the options and ideas described in the book.
The framework can be used to analyze and compare ESP projects. When
using it in this way, certain caveats should be borne in mind:
• ESP teachers and course developers do not necessarily set out to
design lessons and courses according to a predetermined view of language,
learning, or teaching. Courses may develop over time and be contributed
to by different course developers and teachers. In such cases, the rationale
for the course emerges and may change over time.
• Not all ESP projects involve statements of the ideas on which they
are based. The ideas may need to be inferred from the approaches used
in them.
149

FIG. 11.1. Reintroducing the framework.

150

S Y NTHESIS

151

• Although some ESP projects are espoused to specific ideas about the
nature of language, learning, and teaching (for example, some research
projects investigate discipline- or workplace-specific language use in line
with one particular language theory), other projects may involve a mix
of ideas.
• The components of the framework are not necessarily equally important in individual cases. Some ESP courses involve definite ideas about the
type of language content that should be provided but not about the types
of learning activities that should be used. Some reports of research into
discipline- or workplace-specific language use include discussion of how the
findings can be used for teaching and learning, but not all do.

USI NG T H E F R A M E WOR K
This section of the chapter demonstrates how the framework was used to
analyse and compare two different ESP teaching projects. Case One is an
on-site ESP project for a finance center developed by the British Council
in Kuwait. The ‘data’ for the analysis included the course description and
outline, sample teaching materials, tests, postcourse evaluations, and reports prepared by the British Council in Kuwait. The second case is an EAP
course developed at Birmingham University, UK. The ‘data’ for the second
case included a face-to-face interview with the course convenor, the course
outline, and a selection of instructional materials from the course that were
discussed in this interview.
Case One
The first case is an on-site ESP teaching project run in 1999 by the British
Council in Kuwait for five members of the Kuwait Finance Centre (KFC).
The students had a range of English language proficiency levels. The class
met at KFC three times a week for 2 hours each day. Two teachers taught
the course.
The course objectives were stated as: To enable trainees to develop their
speaking, listening, reading and writing skills, and to extend their range of
language structures and vocabulary in the field of finance and investment
so that they can:
• Participate in meetings, discussions, question and answer sessions.
• Understand financial and investment terminology and explain the
market situation in Kuwait and globally.
• Make presentations on aspects of finance and investment.

152

C H A P T E R 11

• Listen to radio and television programs, and take part in international seminars and conferences on finance and investment.
• Write financial and investment reports.
• Constantly update their knowledge and read extensively, assimilating
information from a wide range of published materials on finance and
investment so that they can apply this in their work and be more effective when discussing their work and related issues with colleagues.
• Communicate both face to face and on the telephone, by fax, and
e-mail.
• Socialize with colleagues.
The course description includes statements about the ideas of learning
on which the course was based:
The basic principle of our teaching and training is that the most effective
learning takes place when language is introduced and practised in realistic
contexts. Genuine team communication between participants through group
work, role-play and simulation assists in language acquisition and helps
develop confidence in the learner. This encourages the participants to be
motivated and succeed in their learning.

The instruction was organized into three stages of approximately 50
hours each. Stage Three focused on two main areas: financial vocabulary on
topics such as company finance, bankruptcy, shares and investment, and the
development of spoken fluency in business contexts such as participating
in discussions and meetings, giving presentations, and receiving visitors at
work. Example teaching activities from this stage are:
• Students read or listen to authentic texts, such as official annual
financial reports, newspaper articles about finance, and televised business
news reports. Comprehension tasks such as deciding whether statements
about the text are true or false are provided. Following the comprehension
tasks, the teacher uses the text to focus on vocabulary used in financial
reporting.
• The teacher leads the class in brainstorming language used in meetings. The various speech acts or functions used in meetings (such as agreeing and interrupting) are discussed and possible linguistic realisations
presented. (See Fig. 11.2).
The students were assessed on their knowledge of financial reporting
vocabulary. One assessment task required students to match words and
definitions (such as, antitrust = laws making monopolies illegal).

S Y NTHESIS

153

Analysis. A good deal of attention in this course was given to descriptions of language use. Two types of description were given: description
of speech acts and vocabulary items used in financial reporting, and the
concepts they carried. The course description contained an explicit statement concerning ideas of learning. It was stated that learning was believed
to be most effective when it occurred in groups or teams. This indicated a
leaning toward social interaction views of learning. The course objectives
were stated in terms of language skills and helping students develop specific
work-related competencies, such as writing financial reports. This indicated
that the teacher-course developers saw the function of the course in terms
of training target performance behaviors. This was not surprising given the
fact that the course was a short-term, shot-in-the-arm project that was taught
on-site and had been convened at the behest of the employers. As only a
limited amount of teaching material was available for analysis, I am hesitant
to identify a teaching methodology for this course. The materials I was able
to examine were input-based (input alone or input–output). It is possible
that other methodological options were used on the course. No particular
ideas about the conditions needed for learning were evident. The analysis
is shown in Fig. 11.3.
Case Two
The second case is an academic writing course for scientists and engineers
provided by the English for International Students Unit at Birmingham
University, UK. The Unit offers a number of courses to international students. The courses include academic writing for arts, social science, education and law, exam skills, and thesis writing. The Unit also offers other types
of support, such as consultations with individual students to discuss the
particular pieces of writing they are preparing for their content classes and
computer self-access learning facilities. The analysis of this course is made
on the basis of an interview held in 2001 with the convenor of the course,
Tony Dudley-Evans (former editor of the English for Specific Purposes Journal)
and the samples of instructional materials that he brought with him to the
interview.
The academic writing course for scientists and engineers was (at the time
of the interview) a noncredit-bearing, one-semester course that met once
a week. Most of the students were postgraduates. The course description
specified its aims as to help students with report writing (how to write abstracts, introductions, discussions of results, and conclusions) and common
problems of writing essays (how to organize ideas and arguments). The
course was held in a large lecture theatre, and the instruction (according
to the convenor) was in the form of a ‘lecture about academic writing with
interludes for practice activities.’

154

FIG. 11.2. Notes for the lesson Meetings in English. Reprinted with permission from the British Council, Kuwait.

155
FIG. 11.2 (continued)

156

C H A P T E R 11

FIG. 11.3.

Analysis of Case One.

The convenor described the main focus of instruction as informing students about what types of information should be included in their writing
and how they should be organised. The focus was also on ‘social or cultural
positioning’ (highlighting the kind of information that is appropriate in scientific or engineering writing and what stance student researchers should
take in presenting it). The course was organized around particular genres
and various elements in them (research reports, presentation of results, and
discussion of results).
The course outline did not include an explicit statement about ideas
of learning or methodology. The convenor commented that there had
been little conscious consideration of these questions in developing and
running the course over the years. However, it was possible to make some
inferences about these on the basis of the instructional materials provided
(see examples of this material shown in Fig. 11.4 and Fig. 11.5). In Case
Two a good deal of instructional material was provided, and the materials in
Fig. 11.4 and Fig. 11.5 are fairly representative of the type of instruction in
general. The materials focus on presenting results in research reports. The
teacher leads the class in analysis of the sequential organization of information in terms of moves (the comment on the results and counterarguments)
and on linguistic realisations of the moves (drawing attention to results
through ‘as’ clauses). The activities provided indicate a view of learning

S Y NTHESIS

157

that is intramental and conscious. Instruction aims to draw the students’
conscious attention to features in the language input. They also indicate an
incremental view of learning—the students’ attention is drawn to discrete
items of language with the idea that the students will eventually use the
parts together. A view of learning as an individual activity is indicated.
Students are not required to interact with each other in the activities. The
methodology appears to be based on an input–output teaching strategy.
There is a great deal of attention given to analysis and explication of
language features in the input, and this is followed by practice activities
in which students are to use the information about moves and language
realisations in production work.
Analysis. This course targeted the development of genre knowledge. It
aimed to help students become more explicitly aware of genre conventions
in academic scientific and engineering writing. Thus its role was to reveal
academic language use. It appeared to function to an extent in developing
strategic competence. The course drew on the students’ tacit knowledge
of writing in science and engineering. The convenor described the use
of techniques in instruction to elicit the students’ implicit genre knowledge. Recall that it was at Birmingham University that the team-teaching
approach for highway engineers reported in Dudley-Evans and St. John
(1998) was developed. Figure 11.6 (p. 163) shows an analysis of Case Two
based on the framework.

SU M M A RY
This chapter brought together the various ideas about language, learning
and teaching ESP discussed in earlier chapters and presented a ‘complete
picture’ of the Framework for Analysis of ESP. The framework was then used
as a point of reference for the analysis and description of two ESP teaching
projects. This enabled some key ideas underpinning the two projects to
be identified. It is arguably the ideas basis of ESP programs, as well as situational and contextual factors (such as the type of learner and subject area),
that make them distinctive.
The case analyses revealed two distinctive versions of ESP. The first case
was a shot-in-the-arm, on-site ESP project. It involved a well-articulated
notion of learning through interaction. The language content was speechact-based, with attention given also to key lexical items in financial reporting and the concepts the items carry in that field. The course functioned
to train specific target situation performance competences. The second
project was based on a clearly articulated alignment to genre-based descriptions of language use. A view of learning was not articulated, but a fairly
conventional view of learning as an individual activity involving an emphasis

FIG. 11.4. Drawing the reader’s attention to your results. Prepared by
T. Dudley-Evans and M. St. John (2001). Reprinted by permission.

158

159

S Y NTHESIS

FIG. 11.4 (continued)

on the role of explicit knowledge and language analysis was inferred on the
basis of the instructional materials provided.

QU E ST IONS FOR DI SCUS SION A N D PROJ EC T S
1. Investigate and write a report on an on-going ESP teaching project.
Describe the context and the ideas on which the program is based.
To describe the context provide information about the participants

FIG. 11.5. Establishing the validity of results. Prepared by T. Dudley-Evans
and M. St. John (2001). Reprinted by permission.

160

FIG. 11.5 (continued)

161

FIG. 11.5 (continued)

162

163

S Y NTHESIS

FIG. 11.6. Analysis of Case Two using the framework.

(how many students and teachers are involved, what experience and
knowledge they have of the target environments and where the course
is held). Also provide information on the course (how long it has been
running, why it was set up, who developed the course, course length,
the format of instruction and how students are assessed). To describe
the ideas on which the course is based, refer to the Framework and the
ideas described in preceding chapters. In particular, consider whether
there is a language syllabus and if so, what units the syllabus is organized
around (patterns of grammar or text, speech acts, genres, lexis), the
ideas about learning and teaching methodology that are articulated or
can be inferred from the instructional materials, and the functions of
ESP teaching toward which the program is geared.
This project requires you to collect ‘data’ for analysis. There are
different types of data you can collect including: documents (course
outline, statement of aims and objectives, the syllabus, mission statement
and statement of teaching philosophy), interviews (with teacher-course
developers, the program director and students) and samples of practice
(instructional materials, lesson plans and notes, lesson observations and
tests or other forms of assessment).

164

C H A P T E R 11

FIG. 11.7.

Grid for close analysis of instructional materials.

2. Which has been more important on the ESP courses and programs you
have been involved in—specification of what language is to be taught or
principles for learning?
3. Prepare a course proposal for a group of ESP students that you might
teach in the future. Your proposal needs to include a statement of the
situation (hypothetical), the ideas on which you would base the course,
and a sample lesson plan or piece of instructional material:
• Statement of situation—How long would the course be? Who would
teach the course? Who are the students and what kind of ESP course do
they require (pre-experience, during experience or post-experience).
What is their level of proficiency in English? What needs analysis procedures would you conduct?
• Ideas—What is your view of language learning in ESP? Decide
which ideas to base your course on. Refer to the Framework as a guide.
• Sample Lesson Plan or Instructional Material—Design either a
lesson or a piece of material to demonstrate how you would put your
ideas into practice.

S Y NTHESIS

165

4. Make a close analysis of the instructional materials used in one unit of an
ESP or EAP course. Use the grid shown in Fig. 11.7 as a guide.
What is the main focus of the unit? What types of language description, ideas about learning or methodology are incorporated?
5. Is it important for a group of learners to be aware of the ideas on which
their course of study is based? If you think it is important, describe
activities you could devise to familiarise a new ESP class with the ideas
about language, learning or teaching behind the course they are about
to study.

F U RT H E R R E A DI NG
• Smoak (2003) provides a personal account of her experiences teaching
ESP in which she discusses the various ideas that have influenced her.
• Opting for new ideas in language teaching is one thing but implementing
them is another. Markee’s book (1997) about curricular innovation examines theory and practice in the implementation of change in language
education programs. Lamie (2004) proposes a model of curriculum
innovation and describes attempts made by EFL teachers in Japan to
introduce changes in methods of teaching.
• Littlejohn (1998) discusses the topic of materials evaluation and proposes
a set of objective, analytical procedures that can be followed. Ellis (1998)
argues the need to evaluate materials before, during, and after use.
• Murray (2002) discusses problems related to the definition of ideas in
language teaching.

This page intentionally left blank

References

Adam, C., & Artemeva, N. (2002). Writing instruction in English for academic purposes (EAP)
classes: Introducing second language learners to the academic community. In A. M. Johns
(Ed.), Genre in the classroom (pp. 179–196). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Allison, D. (1996). Pragmatist discourse and English for academic purposes. English for Specific
Purposes Journal, 16(4), 85–103.
Allison, D. (1998). Response to Pennycook: Whether, why and how? English for Specific Purposes
Journal, 17(3), 313–316.
Allison, D. (1999). Key concepts in ELT: Genre. English Language Teaching Journal, 53(2), 144.
Anderson, J. (1980). Cognitive psychology and its implications. New York: Freeman.
Anderson, J. (1983). The architecture of cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Auerbach, E. R. (1995). The politics of the ESL classroom: Issues of power in pedagogical
choices. In R. Tollefson (Ed.), Power and inequality in language education (pp. 9–33). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Badger, R., & White, G. (2000). A process genre approach to teaching writing. English Language Teaching Journal, 54(2), 153–160.
Ball, D. (1994). Language engineering: With special reference to the banking sector. Unpublished
masters dissertation, Aston University, Birmingham.
Barber, C. L. (1985). Some measurable characteristics of modern scientific prose. In J. Swales
(Ed.), Episodes in ESP (pp. 1–16) Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall. (original work published in 1962)
Bardovi-Harlig, K. H. (1990). Do language learners recognize pragmatic violations? Pragmatic
versus grammatical awareness in instructed L2 learning. Teaching English to Speakers of Other
Languages Quarterly, 32(2), 233–259.
Bardovi-Harlig, K. H. (2001). Evaluating the empirical evidence: Grounds for instruction in
pragmatics? In K. R. Rose & G. Kasper (Eds.), Pragmatics in language teaching (pp. 13–32).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Basturkmen, H. (1998a). Refining procedures: A needs analysis project at Kuwait University.
English Teaching Forum, 36(4), 2–9.
Basturkmen, H. (1998b). Showing attitude: Uses of hedging in academic speaking. New Zealand Studies in Applied Linguistics, 4, 49–67.
Basturkmen, H. (1999). Discourse in MBA Seminars. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 18(1),
63–80.
Basturkmen, H. (2003). Specificity and ESP course design. Regional English Language Council
Journal, 34(1), 48–63.
Basturkmen, H., & Elder, C. (2004). The practice of LSP. In A. Davies & C. Elder (Eds.), The
handbook of applied linguistics (pp. 672–694). Oxford: Blackwell.

167

168

R EF ER ENCES

Basturkmen, H., & Lewis, M. (2002). Learner perspectives of success in an EAP writing course.
Assessment in Second Language Writing, 8, 31–46.
Bazerman, C. (1988). Shaping written knowledge: The genre and activity of the experimental article in
science. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Beaugrande, R. (1997). Theory and practice in Applied Linguistics: Disconnection, conflict,
or dialectic? Applied Linguistics, 18, 279–313.
Benesch, S. (1996). Needs analysis and curriculum development in EAP: An example of a critical approach. Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages Quarterly, 30(4), 723–738.
Benesch, S. (1999). Rights analysis: Studying power relations in an academic setting. English for
Specific Purposes Journal, 18(4), 313–327.
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for Academic Purposes: Theory, politics and practice. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Benson, M. (1994). Lecture comprehension in an ethnographic perspective. In J. Flowerdew
(Ed.), Academic listening: Research perspectives (pp. 181–198). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. N. (1993). Re-thinking genre from a socio-cognitive perspective. Written Communication, 4, 475–509.
Bhatia, V. J. (1982). An investigation into formal and functional characteristics of qualifications in
legislative writing and its application to English for academic legal purposes. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Aston University, Birmingham, England.
Bhatia, V. J. (1993). Analysing genre: Language use in professional settings. London: Longman.
Bishop-Petty, A., & Engel, R. (2001). Teaching ESP through user-friendly study guides. Paper presented at TESOL Convention, St. Louis, MO.
Blaikie, N. (1995). Approaches to scientific enquiry. Oxford: Polity Press.
Bloor, M. (1998). English for Specific Purposes: The preservation of the species. English for
Specific Purposes Journal, 17(1), 47–66.
Bloor, M., & Bloor, T. (1986). Languages for specific purposes: Practice and theory (occasional paper
no. 19). Dublin: Trinity College.
Bloor, M., & Bloor, T. (1993). How economists modify propositions. In W. Henderson,
T. Dudley-Evans, & R. Backhouse (Eds.), Economics and language (pp. 153–169.). London:
Routledge.
Bloor, T., & Bloor, M. (1991). Cultural expectations and socio-pragmatic failure in academic
writing. In P. Adams, B. Heaton, & P. Howarth (Eds.), Socio-cultural issues in English for
Academic Purposes (pp. 1–12). London: Macmillan.
Blue, G. M., & Harun, M. (2002). Hospitality language as a professional skill. English for Specific
Purposes, 22(1), 73–91.
Bosher, S., & Smalkoski, K. (2002). From needs analysis to curriculum development: Designing a course in health-care communication for immigrant students in the USA. English for
Specific Purposes Journal, 21(1), 59–79.
Boxer, D. P. L. (1995). Problems in the presentation of speech acts in ELT materials: The case
of complaints. English Language Teaching Journal, 49(1), 44–58.
Brinton, D. M., Snow, M. A., & Wesche, M. B. (1989). Content-based second language instruction.
New York: Newbury House.
Brown, J. D. (1995). The elements of language curriculum. Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. L. (1988). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Cadman, K. (1997). Thesis writing for international students: A question of identity. English for
Specific Purposes Journal, 16(1), 3–14.
Chambers, F. (1980). A re-evaluation of needs analysis in ESP. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 1(1), 25–33.
Chia, H. U., Johnson, R., Chia, H. L., & Olive, F. (1999). English for college students in Taiwan:

R EF ER ENCES

169

A study of the perceptions of English needs in a medical context. English for Specific Purposes
Journal, 18(2), 107–119.
Clapham, C. (2001). Discipline specificity and EAP. In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock (Eds.),
Research perspectives in English for Academic Purposes (pp. 84–100). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Clennell, C. (1999). Promoting pragmatic awareness and spoken discourse skills with EAP
classes. English Language Teaching Journal, 53(2), 83–91.
Clerehan, R., & Croslin, G. (1998). Minds meeting. In P. Master & D. M. Brinton (Eds.), New
ways in teaching ESP (pp. 239–241). Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of
Other Languages.
Cohen, I. J. (1996). Theories of action and praxis. In B. S. Turner (Ed.), Social theory (pp.
111–142). Oxford: Blackwell.
Coleman, H. (1996). Society and the language classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Comfort, J. (1995). Effective presentations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Connor, U. (2002). New directions in contrastive rhetoric. Teaching English to Speakers of Other
Languages Quarterly, 36(4), 493–510.
Cook, G. (1989). Discourse. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cook, V. (1997). Second language learning and language teaching. London: Arnold.
Corder, S. Pit (1993). Introducing applied linguistics. London: Penguin. (Original work published 1973)
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic wordlist. Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages
Quarterly, 34(2), 213–238.
Coxhead, A., & Nation, P. (2001). The specialised vocabulary of English for academic purposes. In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for Academic
Purposes (pp. 252–267). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crandall, E. (1999). Developing and evaluating pragmatics-focused materials. Unpublished masters
thesis, The University of Auckland.
Crandall, E., & Basturkmen, H. (2004). Evaluating pragmatics-focused materials. English Language Teaching Journal, 59(1), 38–49.
Crookes, A. (2001). An E-commerce web page project. Paper presented at TESOL Convention, St.
Louis.
Devitt, A. J. (1991). Intertextuality in tax accounting: Generic, referential and functional. In
C. Bazerman & J. Paradis (Eds.), Textual dynamics of the professions: Historical and contemporary
studies of writing in professional communities (pp. 336–357). Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press.
Dhieb-Henia, N. (2003). Evaluating the effectiveness of metacognitive strategy training for
reading research articles in an ESP context. English for Specific Purposes, 22(4), 397–417.
Dinham, S., & Stritter, F. (1986). Research on professional education. In M. Wittrock (Ed.),
Handbook of research on teaching (pp. 952–970). New York: Macmillan.
Donato, R. (2000). Sociocultural contributions to the understanding of foreign and second
language classroom learning. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language
learning (pp. 27–50). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Douglas, D. (2000). Assessing Language for Specific Purposes. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Dudley-Evans, T. (1994). Genre analysis: an approach for ESP. In M. Coulthard (Ed.), Advances
in written text analysis (pp. 219–222). London: Routledge.
Dudley-Evans, T. (2001). Team-teaching in EAP: Changes and adaptations in the Birmingham
approach. In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for Academic
Purposes (pp. 225–238). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dudley-Evans, T., & St. John, M. (1998). Developments in English for Specific Purposes. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

170

R EF ER ENCES

Early, P. (1981). The ESP teacher’s role — implications for the ‘knower–client’ relationship. In
English Language Teaching Document 112 The ESP Teacher: Role, Development and Prospects (pp.
42–52). London: British Council.
Ellis, R. (1990). Instructed Second Language Acquisition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ellis, R. (1997). SLA and second language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, R. (1998). The evaluation of communicative tasks. In B. Tomlinson (Ed.), Materials development in language teaching (pp. 217–238). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ellis, R. (2003). Task based learning and teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H., & Loewen, S. (2001) Pre-emptive focus on form in the ESL classroom. Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages Quarterly, 35(3), 407–432.
English Language Centre, Kuwait University. (1997). Materials developed in-house by the English Language Unit Engineering (unpublished resource).
Erlam, R. (2003). Evaluating the relative effectiveness of structured-input and output-based instruction in foreign language learning. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 25, 559–582.
Esteban, A. A., & Canado, M. L. P. (2004). Making the case method work in teaching Business
English: A case study. English for Specific Purposes, 23(2), 137–161.
Evangelou, E. (1994). Target needs and learning needs in ESP for nurses. Unpublished masters
thesis, Aston University, Birmingham.
Fairclough, N. (1992). Critical language awareness. London: Longman.
Ferguson, G. (1997). Teacher education and LSP: The role of specialized knowledge. In
R. Howard & G. Brown (Eds.), Teacher education for LSP (pp. 80–89). Clevedon: Multilingual
Matters.
Ferguson, G. (2001). If you pop over there: A corpus based study of conditionals in medical
discourse. English for Specific Purposes, 20(1), 61–82.
Ferris, D. (1998). Students’ views of academic aural/oral skills: a comparative needs analysis.
Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages Quarterly, 32(2), 289–319.
Ferris, D. (2001). Teaching writing for academic purposes. In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock
(Eds.), Research perspective on English for Academic Purposes (pp. 298–314). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Field, J. (1998). Skills and strategies: Towards a new methodology for listening. English Language Teaching Journal, 52(2), 110–118.
Flowerdew, J., & Peacock, M. (2001a). The EAP curriculum: Issues, methods and challenges.
In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for Academic Purposes
(pp. 177–194). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Flowerdew, J., & Peacock, M. (2001b). Issues in EAP: A preliminary perspective. In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for Academic Purposes (pp. 8–24).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Flowerdew, L. (1998). Persuasive proposals. In P. Master & D. M. Brinton (Eds.), New ways in
English for Specific Purposes (pp. 148–149). Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Sepakers
of Other Languages.
Flowerdew, L. (2000). Using a genre-based framework to teach organizational structure in
academic writing. English Language Teaching Journal, 54(4), 369–378.
Flowerdew, L. (2001). Genre-based materials for engineering students. Paper presented at TESOL
Convention, St. Louis.
Freedman, A. (1999). Beyond the text: Towards understanding the teaching and learning of
genres. Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages Quarterly, 33(4), 764–767.
Freeman, Y. S., & Freeman, D. (1989). Whole language approaches to writing with secondary
students of English as a second language. In D. Johnson & D. Roen (Eds.), Richness in writing: Empowering ESL students (pp. 177–193). New York: Longman.
Funnel, P., & Owen, J. (1992). Delivering and measuring competence. In D. Saunders &
P. Race (Eds.), Aspects of educational training technology: Developing and measuring competence
(pp. 27–32). London: Kogan Page.

R EF ER ENCES

171

Giddens, A. (1979). Central problems in social theory: Action, structure and contradiction in social
analysis. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Gimenez, J. C. (2001). Ethnographic observations in cross-cultural business negotiations
between non-native speakers of English: An exploratory study. English for Specific Purposes
Journal, 20(2), 169–193.
Graves, K. (1996). Teachers as course developers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hafner, C. (1999). Genre, register: A comparative study of writing for academic purposes. Unpublished
masters thesis, University of Auckland.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1973). Explorations in the functions of language. London: Edward Arnold.
Harwood, N., & Hadley, G. (2004). Demystifying institutional practices: Critical pragmatism
and the teaching of academic writing. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 23(4), 355–377.
Hatch, E. (1992). Discourse and language education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hedge, T. (2000). Teaching and learning in the language classroom. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Henry, A., & Roseberry, R. (1998). An evaluation of a genre-based approach to the teaching
of EAP/ESP writing. Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages Quarterly, 32(1), 147–
156.
Hirose, K. (2003). Comparing L1 and L2 organizational patterns in argumentative writing of
Japanese EFL students. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12(2), 181–209.
Hirvela, A. (1997). Disciplinary portfolios and EAP writing Instruction. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 16(2), 83–100.
Hoey, M. (1994). Signalling in discourse: a functional analysis of a common discourse patterns
in written and spoken English. In M. Coulthard (Ed.), Advances in written text analysis (pp.
26–45). London: Routledge.
Hoey, M. (2001). Textual interaction. London: Routledge.
Holmes, J. (1983). The structure of teachers’ directives. In J. C. Richards & R. W. Schmit
(Eds.), Language and communication (pp. 89–113). London: Longman.
Holmes, J. (1998). No joking matter! The function of humour in the workplace. Australian Linguistics
Society, Brisbane University of Queensland.
Holmes, J. (1999). Managing social talk at work: What does the NESB worker need to know?
Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages Journal 7, 7–19.
Hopkins, A., & Dudley-Evans, T. (1988). A genre-based investigation of the discussion sections
in articles and dissertations. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 7, 113–121.
Hopper, P. (1987). Emergent grammar. Berkeley Linguistics Society, 13, 139–157.
Huang, J.-Y. (2000). Description of compliment speech act: A critical analysis of its treatment in ELT
materials. Unpublished masters dissertation, University of Auckland.
Hudson, T. (1991). A content comprehension approach to reading English for science and
technology. Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages Quarterly, 25(1), 77–104.
Hutchinson, T., & Waters, A. (1985). ESP at the crossroads. In J. Swales (Ed.), Episodes in ESP
(p. 177–187) Oxford: Pergamon.
Hutchinson, T., & Waters, A. (1987). English for Specific Purposes: A learning-centred approach.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hyland, K. (1996). Writing without conviction? Hedging in science and research articles.
Applied Linguistics, 17(4), 433–454.
Hyland, K. (2002a). Specificity revisited: How far should we go? English for Specific Purposes,
21(4), 385–395.
Hyland, K. (2002b). Teaching and researching writing. Harlow: Longman.
Hyland, K., & Hamp-Lyons, L. (2002). EAP: Isues and directions. Journal of English for Academic
Purposes, 1(1), 1–12.
Ibrahim, A. (1993). A case study of the manufacturing industry: The ethnographic way. Unpublished
masters dissertation, Aston University, Birmingham.

172

R EF ER ENCES

Jacoby, S., Leech, D., & Holton, C. (1995). A genre-based developmental investigation writing
course for undergraduate ESL science majors. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic
writing in a second language (pp. 351–374). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Jasso-Aguilar, R. (1999). Sources, methods and triangulation in needs analysis: A critical perspective in a case study of Waikiki Hotel maids. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 18(1),
27–46.
Jin, L., & Cortezzi, M. (1996). This way is very different from Chinese ways: EAP needs and
academic culture. Review of English Language Teaching, 6(1), 205–216.
Johns, A., & Dudley-Evans, T. (1991). English for specific purposes: International in scope, specific in purpose. Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages Quarterly, 25(2), 297–314.
Johns, A. M. (1997a). English for specific purposes and content based instruction: What is
the relationship? In M. A. Snow & D. M. Brinton (Eds.), The content based classroom (pp.
363–366). White Plains, NY: Longman.
Johns, A. M. (1997b). Text, role and context: Developing academic literacies. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Johns, A. M. (2002). Genre in the classroom. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Johns, T. F., & Dudley-Evans, T. (1985). An experiment in team-teaching of overseas postgraduate students of transportation and plant biology. In J. Swales (Ed.), Episodes in ESP
(pp. 140–153). Oxford: Pergamon.
Jones-Macziola, S., with White, G. (1998). Further ahead learner’s book. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Jordan, R. R. (1997). English for Academic Purposes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kaplan, R. B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education. Language Learning,
16, 1–20.
Kasper, G. (2001). Classroom research on interlanguage pragmatics. In R. Rose & G. Kasper
(Eds.), Pragmatics in language teaching (pp. 33–60). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Kasper, G., & Rose, K. R. (2001). Pragmatics in language teaching. In K. R. Rose, & G. Kasper
(Eds.), Pragmatics in language teaching (pp. 1–10). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kasper, L. F. (1997). The impact of content-based instructional programs on the academic
progress of ESL students. English for Specific Purposes, 16(4), 309–320.
Kirkgoz, Y. (1999). Knowledge acquisition from L2 specialist texts. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Aston University, Birmingham.
Kobayshi, H. (1984). Rhetorical patterns in English and Japanese. Teaching English to Speakers
of Other Languages Quarterly, 18(4), 737–738.
Krashen, S. D. (1982). Principles and practice in second language acquisition. Oxford: Pergamon.
Kurtoglu, N. (1992). Evidence on the discourse discrepancy between DBE and three discourse communities at METU. Unpublished masters dissertation, Aston University, Birmingham.
Kusel, P. (1992). Rhetorical approaches to the study and composition of academic essays. System, 20(4), 457–460.
Lakoff, G. (1973). Hedges: A study in meaning criteria and the logic of fuzzy concepts. Journal
of Philosophical Logic, 2, 458–508.
Lamie, J. (2004). Presenting a model of change. Language Teaching Research, 8(2), 115–142.
Lantolf, J. (2000). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Leech, G. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Li So-mui, F., & Mead, K. (2000). An analysis of English in the workplace: The communication needs of textile and clothing merchandisers. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 19(4),
351–368.
Lightbrown, P. (2000). Classroom SLA research and second language teaching. Applied Linguistics, 21(4), 431–462.

R EF ER ENCES

173

Linde, C. (1988). The quantitative study of communicative success: Politeness and accidents
in aviation discourse. Language in Society, 17, 375–399.
Lindemann, S., & Mauranen, A. (2001). “It’s just real messy”: The occurrence and function
of just in a corpus of academic speech. English for Specific Purposes, 20, Supplement 1,
459–475.
Littlejohn, A. (1998). The analysis of language teaching materials: Inside the Trojan horse. In
B. Tomlinson (Ed.), Materials development in language teaching (pp. 190–216). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Loewen, S., & Basturkmen, H. (2005). Interaction, focus on form and group writing tasks in an
EAP classroom. Journal of Asian Pacific Communication, 15(1), 171–190.
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition.
In W. C. Richie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413–468).
San Diego: Academic Press.
Long, M. H., & Crookes, G. (1992). Three approaches to task-based syllabus design. Teaching
English to Speakers of Other Languages Quarterly, 26(1), 27–56.
Lynch, T., & Maclean, J. (2000). Exploring the benefits of task repetition and recycling. Language Teaching Research, 4(3), 221–250.
Markee, N. (1997). Managing curricular innovation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martinez, A. C. L. (2001). Empirical examination of EFL readers’ use of rhetorical information. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 21(1), 81–98.
Master, P. (1998). Positive and negative aspects of the dominance of English. Teaching English
to Speakers of Other Languages Quarterly, 32(4), 716–727.
Master, P., & Brinton, D. M. (1998). New ways in English for Specific Purposes. Alexandria, VA:
TESOL.
McCarthy, M. (1991). Discourse analysis for language teachers. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
McCarthy, C., & Carter, R. (1994). Language as discourse. London: Longman.
McLaughlin, B. (1987). Theories of second language learning. London: Arnold.
McLaughlin, B., & Heredia, J. L. C. (1996). Information processing approaches to research on
second language acquisition and use. In W. C. Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of
second language acquisition (pp. 213–228). San Diego: Academic Press.
Miller, C. (1984). Genre as social action. In A. Freedman & P. Medway (Eds.), Genre and the New
Rhetoric (pp. 23–42) London: Taylor & Francis.
Minkoff, P. (1994). Executive skills. Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall.
Mitchell, R., & Myles, F. (1998). Second language learning theories. London: Arnold.
Munby, J. (1978). Communicative syllabus design. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Muranoi, H. (2000). Focus on form through interaction enhancement: Integrating formal
instruction into a communicative task. Language Learning, 50(4), 617–673.
Murray, N. (2002). Ideas, their definition, and their vulnerability. English Language Teaching
Journal, 56(2), 187–189.
Myers, G. (1989). The pragmatics of politeness in scientific articles. Applied Linguistics, 10(1),
1–35.
Nurweni, A., & Read, J. (1998). The English vocabulary knowledge of Indonesian university
students. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 18(2), 161–175.
Orr, T. (1998). Genre files. In P. Master & D. M. Brinton (Eds.), New ways in English for Specific
Purposes (pp. 103–105). Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages.
Paltridge, B. (2000). Making sense of discourse. Gold Coast, Queensland: Antepoedean Educational Enterprises.
Parkinson, J. (2000). Acquiring scientific literacy through content and genre: A theme-based
language course for science students. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 19(4), 369–387.

174

R EF ER ENCES

Parks, S. (2001). Moving from school to the workplace: Disciplinary innovation, border crossings, and the reshaping of a written genre. Applied Linguistics, 22(4), 405–438.
Pascal Brown, T. (2001). Might be worth getting it done then: Directives in a New Zealand factory.
Unpublished masters dissertation, Victoria University of Wellington.
Pascal Brown, T., & Lewis, M. (2002). An ESP project: Analysis of an authentic workplace
conversation. English for Specific Purposes, 22(1), 93–98.
Pennycook, A. (1997a). Critical applied linguistics and education. In R. Wodak & D. Corson
(Eds.), Encyclopedia of language and education (Vol. 1, pp. 23–31). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Pennycook, A. (1997b). Vulgar pragmatism, critical pragmatism, and EAP. English for Specific
Purposes, 16(4), 253–269.
Pennycook, A. (2003). Critical applied linguistics. In A. Davies & C. Elder (Eds.), The handbook
of applied linguistics (pp. 784–807). Oxford: Blackwell.
Pica, T. (1988). Interlanguage adjustments as an outcome of NS-NNS negotiated interaction.
Language Learning, 38, 45–73.
Pica, T., Young, R, & Doughty, C. (1987). The impact of interaction on comprehension. Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages Quarterly, 21(4), 737–758.
Prahbu, N. S. (1987). Second language pedagogy: A perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., & Svartik, J. (1972). A grammar of contemporary English.
London: Longman.
Richards, J. C. (1990). The language teaching matrix. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Richards, J. C., & Rodgers, T. S. (1986). Approaches and methods in language teaching. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Riggenbach, H. (1990). Discourse analysis and spoken language instruction. Annual Review of
Applied Linguistics, 11, 152–163.
Rignall, M., & Furneaux, C. (1997). Speaking student’s book. Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall.
Robinson, P. (1991). ESP today. London: Prentice Hall.
Robinson, P., Strong, G., Whittle, J., & Nobe, S. (2001). The development of EAP oral discussion ability. In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for Academic
Purposes (pp. 347–359). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Roebuck, R. (2000). Subjects speak out: How learners position themselves in a psycholinguistic task. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language acquisition (pp. 79–96).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rose, K. R., & Kasper, G. (2001). Pragmatics in language teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sager, J., Dungworth, D., & McDonald, P. F. (1980). English special languages. Wiesbaden, Germany: Brandsetter Verlag.
Sakr, A. (2001). English for textile and clothing industry. Paper presented at TESOL Convention,
St. Louis.
Samraj, B. (2002). Introductions in research articles: variations across disciplines. English for
Specific Purposes Journal, 21(1), 1–17.
Santos, V. B. M. (2002). Genre analysis of business letters of negotiation. English for Specific
Purposes Journal, 21(2), 167–199.
Schmidt, R. (1994). Deconstructing consciousness in search of useful definitions for Applied
Linguistics. AILA (Association Internationale de Linguistique) Review, 11, 11–26.
Schumann, J. (1978). The acculturation model for second language acquisition. In R. Gingas
(Ed.), Second language acquisition and foreign language learning (pp. 27–50). Arlington, VA:
Centre for Applied Linguistics.
Schumann, J. (1986). Research on the acculturation model for second language acquisition.
Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 7, 379–392.
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. (1995). Intercultural communication. Oxford: Blackwell.
Scott, H., & Scott, J. (1984). ESP and Rubik’s cube: Three dimensions in course design and

R EF ER ENCES

175

materials writing. In J. Swales & H. Mustafa (Eds.), English for Specific Purposes and the Arab
World. Birmingham: Aston University.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of language. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Seedhouse, P. (1999). Task-based interaction. English Language Teaching Journal, 53(3), 149–
156.
Selinker, L., & Douglas, D. (1985). Wrestling with ‘context’ in interlanguage theory. Applied
Linguistics, 6(2), 190–204.
Sengupta, S., Forey, G., & Hamp-Lyons, L. (1999). Supporting effective English communication within the context of teaching and research in a tertiary institute: Developing a
genre model for consciousness raising. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 18(supplement),
S7–22.
Sharwood Smith, M. (1993). Input enhancement in instructed SLA: Theoretical bases. Studies
in Second Language Acquisition, 15, 165–179.
Silver, M. (2003). The stance of stance: A critical look at ways stance is expressed and modelled
in academic discourse. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(4), 359–374.
Smoak, R. (2003). What is English for Specific Purposes? English Teaching Forum, 41(2), 22–
27.
Snow, M. A., & Brinton, D. M. (1997). The content based classroom. White Plains, NY: Longman.
Starks-Martin, G. (1998). Listen Up! In P. Master & D. M. Brinton (Eds.), New ways in English
for specific purposes (pp. 103–105). Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other
Languages.
Stenstrom, A. (1994). An introduction to spoken interaction. London: Longman.
Stern, H. H. (1983). Fundamental concepts in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Stern, H. H. (1989). Seeing the wood and the trees. In K. Johnson (Ed.), The second language
curriculum (pp. 207–221). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stern, H. H. (1992). Issues and options in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sullivan, P., & Girginer, H. (2002). The use of discourse analysis to enhance ESP teacher knowledge: An example of aviation English. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 21(4), 397–404.
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible output in
its development. In S. Gass & C. Maden (Eds.), Input in Second Language Acquisition (pp.
235–253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Swain, M. (1998). Focus on form through conscious reflection. In C. Doughety & J. Williams
(Eds.), Focus on form in classroom Second Language Acquisition (pp. 64–82). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Swales, J. (1985). Episodes in ESP. Oxford: Pergamon.
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Swales, J. (1998). Language, science and scholarship. In the Wei Lun Lecture Series VII, 25–35.
Hong Kong: The Chinese University of Hong Kong Press.
Swales, J. (2001). EAP-related research: An intellectual history. In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock
(Eds.), Research perspectives on English for Academic Purposes (pp. 42–54). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Swales, J., & Feak, C. B. (1994). Academic writing for graduate students: Essential tasks and skills.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Tarone, E. S., Dwyer, S., Gillette, S., & Icke, V. (1981). One the use of the passive in two astrophysics articles. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 1(2), 123–140.
Tauroza, S. (2001). Second language lecture comprehension research in naturalistic controlled conditions. In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for
Academic Purposes (pp. 360–374). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

176

R EF ER ENCES

Thomas, J. (1983). Cross-cultural pragmatic failure. Applied Linguistics, 4(2), 91–112.
Thomas, J. (1995). Meaning in interaction. Harlow, Essex: Longman.
Thursten, J., & Candlin, C. N. (1997). Exploring Academic English. Macquarie University:
National Centre for Language Teaching and Research.
Thursten, J., & Candlin, C. N. (1998). Concordancing and the teaching of the vocabulary of
Academic English. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 17(3), 267–280.
Tollefson, J. W. (1991). Planning language, planning inequality. New York: Longman.
Tomlinson, B. (1998). Materials development in language teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Turner, J. (1996). Cultural values in genre skills: The case of the Fine Arts tutorial. In M. Hewings & T. Dudley-Evans (Eds.), Evaluation and course design in EAP. London: Prentice Hall
Macmillan in association with the British Council.
Ur, P. (1996). A course in language teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
van Lier, L. (2000). From input to affordance: Social-interactive learning from an ecological perspective. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp.
245–260). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
van Lier, L. (2002). Ecology, contingency and talk in the postmethod classroom. New Zealand
Studies in Applied Linguistics, 8, 1–20.
Vassileva, I. (2001). Commitment and detachment in English and Bulgarian academic writing.
English for Specific Purposes Journal, 20(1), 83–102.
Waters, A., & Waters, M. (2001). Designing tasks for developing study competence and study
skills in English. In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for
Academic Purposes (pp. 375–389). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Watson Todd, R. (2003). EAP or TEAP? Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(2), 61–70.
Webber, M. (1983). Elementary technical English. Edinburgh: Nelson.
Weber, J. J. (2001). A concordance and genre-informed approach to ESP essay writing. English
Language Teaching Journal, 55(1), 14–20.
Wesche, M. B. (1993). Discipline-based approaches to language study: Research issues and
outcomes. In M. Kruger & F. Ryan (Eds.), Language and content: Discipline and content-based
approaches to language study (pp. 57–82). Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath.
West, M. (1953). A general service list of English Words. London: Longman.
West, R. (1994). Needs analysis in language teaching. Language Teaching Abstracts, 1–19.
West, R. (1997). Needs analysis: State of the art. In R. Howard & G. Brown (Eds.), Teacher
education for LSP (pp. 68–79). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Wharton, S. (1999). From postgraduate student to published writer: Discourse variation and development in TESOL. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Aston University, Birmingham.
White, J. (1998). Getting the learners’ attention: A typographical input enhancement study. In
C. Doughety & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp.
85–113). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
White, M. (2003). Metaphor and economics: The case of growth. English for Specific Purposes,
22(2), 131–151.
White, R. (1988). The ELT curriculum. Oxford: Blackwell.
Widdowson, H. G. (1983). Learning purpose and language use. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Willis, J. (1990). The lexical syllabus. London: Collins.
Willis, J. (1998). Concordances in the classroom without a computer: Assembling and exploiting concordances of common words. In B. Tomlinson (Ed.), Materials development in language teaching (pp. 44–66). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Winter, E. (1994). Clause relations as information structure: Two basic text structures in English. In M. Coulthard (Ed.), Advances in written text analysis (pp. 46–88). London: Routledge.

R EF ER ENCES

177

Xue, G., & Nation, I. S. P. (1984). The university word list. Language Learning and Communication, 3, 215–229.
Yates, J., & Orlikowski, W. (1997). Genres of organisational communication: A structurational
approach to studying communication and media. In C. G. A. Bryant & D. Jary (Eds.),
Antony Giddens: Critical assessments (pp. 387–415). London: Routledge.
Zhu, Y. (1997). An analysis of structural moves in Chinese sales letters. Text, 17(4), 543–566.

This page intentionally left blank

Author Index

A
Adam, C., 54, 167
Allison, D., 52, 141, 142, 167
Anderson, J., 98, 101, 167
Artemeva, N., 54, 167
Auerbach, E. R., 19, 167
Austin, J. L., 48, 167

B
Badger, R., 81, 121, 122, 167
Ball. D., 136, 167
Barber, C. L., 4, 35, 63, 167
Bardovi-Harlig, K. H., 50, 51, 167
Basturkmen, H., 18, 29, 51, 62, 71, 100,
107,108, 116, 119, 130, 141, 167, 168,
169, 170, 173
Bazerman, C., 56, 168
Beaugrande, R. de, 9, 168
Benesch, S., x, 6, 20, 141, 143, 144, 146,
168
Benson, M., 88, 168
Berkenkotter, C., 55, 168
Bhatia, V. J., 4, 9, 168
Bishop-Petty, A., 104, 168
Blaikie, N., 7, 11, 168
Bloor, M., 5, 15, 17, 47, 62, 143, 168
Bloor, T., 15, 17, 47, 62, 143, 168
Blue, G. M., 47, 168
Bosher, S., 26, 168
Boxer, D. P. L., 51, 168
Brinton, D. M., 101, 103, 109, 117, 168,
173, 175
Brown, J. D., 24, 168
Brown, P., 61, 168

C
Cadman, K., 89, 143, 168
Canado, M. L. P., 131, 170
Candlin, C. N., 68, 122, 123, 176
Carter, R., 38, 173
Chambers, F., 20, 168
Chia, H. L., 18, 168
Chia, H. U., 18, 168
Clapham, C., 25, 169
Clennell, C., 127, 169
Clerehan, R., 128, 129, 169
Cohen, I. J., 10, 169
Coleman, H., 142, 169
Comfort, J., 64, 169
Connor, U., 45, 169
Cook, G., 48, 169
Cook, V., 98, 169
Corder, S. Pit, 16, 169
Cortezzi, M., 143, 172
Coxhead, A., 17, 29, 169
Crandall, E., 50, 51, 71, 169
Crookes, A., 126, 169
Crookes, G., 21, 25, 93, 96, 173
Croslin, G., 128, 129, 169

D
Devitt, A. J., 56, 169
Dhieb-Henia, N., 99, 108, 169
Dinham, S., 137, 169
Donato, R., 106, 169
Doughty, C., 91, 174
Douglas, D., 5, 137, 138, 146, 169, 175
Dudley-Evans, T., ix, 4, 5, 19, 25, 51, 53, 55,
59, 63, 114, 122, 125, 139, 140, 146,
157, 169, 171, 172

179

180

AU T HO R I N D E X

Dungworth, D., 66, 174
Dwyer, S., 5, 51, 66, 175

E
Early, P., 139, 170
Elder, C., 29, 141, 167
Ellis, R., 96, 101, 108, 116, 124, 125, 132,
165, 170
Engel, R., 104, 168
Erlam, R., 116, 132, 170
Esteban, A. A., 132, 170
Evangelou, E., 18, 170

Henry, A., 119, 171
Heredia, J. L. C., 97, 173
Hirose, K., 41, 171
Hirvela, A., 137, 171
Hoey, M., 38, 39, 43, 45, 171
Holmes, J., 23, 80, 171
Holton, C., 122, 172
Hopkins, A., 122, 171
Hopper, P., 35, 171
Huang, J. Y., 51, 171
Huckin, T. N., 55, 168
Hudson, T., 102, 171
Hutchinson, T., 5, 20, 23, 103, 114, 137, 138,
171
Hyland, K., 29, 54, 62, 141, 171

F
Fairclough, N., 142, 170
Feak, C., 42, 43, 175
Ferguson, G., 66, 146, 170
Ferris, D., 18, 26, 170
Field, J., 27, 170
Flowerdew, L., 60, 122, 170
Flowerdew, J., 5, 10, 24, 26, 170
Forey, G., 122, 175
Freedman, A., 55, 170
Freeman, D., 22, 170
Freeman, Y. S., 22, 170
Funnel, P., 135, 170
Furneaux, C., 79, 174

G
Giddens, A., 7, 9, 10, 12, 54, 171
Gillette, S., 5, 51, 66, 175
Gimenez, J. C., 137, 171
Girginer, H., 49, 175
Graves, K., 21, 171
Greenbaum, S., 16, 174

H
Hadley, G., 146, 171
Hafner, C., 58, 171
Halliday, M. A. K., 22, 171
Hamp-Lyons, L., 122, 141, 171, 174
Harun, M., 47, 168
Harwood, N., 146, 171
Hatch, E., 48, 49, 171
Hedge, T., 29, 35, 171

I
Ibrahim, A. 19, 171
Icke, V., 5, 51, 66, 175

J
Jacoby, S., 122, 172
Jasso-Aguilar, R., 19, 20, 92, 172
Jin, L., 143, 172
Johns, A. 19, 172
Johns, A. M., 70, 96, 108, 172
Johns, T. F., 140, 172
Johnson, R., 18, 168
Jones-Macziola, S., 37, 172
Jordan, R. R., 4, 27, 172

K
Kaplan, R. B., 58, 172
Kasper, G., 49, 50, 51, 172, 174
Kasper, L. F., 101, 102, 172
Kirkgoz, Y., 66, 67, 86, 89, 172
Kobayshi, H., 40, 172
Krashen, S. D., 90, 115, 116, 172
Kurtoglu, N., 19, 172
Kusel, P., 122, 172

L
Lakoff, G., 61, 172
Lamie, J., 165, 172
Lantolf, J., 105, 109, 172

181

AU T HO R I N D E X
Leech, D., 122, 172
Leech, G., 16, 17, 49, 172, 174
Levinson, S. L., 60, 168
Lewis, M., 81, 107, 108, 168, 174
Lightbrown, P., 116, 119, 172
Linde, C., 23, 173
Lindmann, S., 66, 173
Li So-Mui, F., 19, 172
Littlejohn, A., 165, 173
Loewen, S., 116, 119, 170, 173
Long, M. H., 19, 21, 25, 90, 91, 93, 96, 173
Lynch, T., 93, 173

Parks, S., 71, 89, 96, 174
Pascal Brown, T., 23, 78, 174
Peacock, M., 5, 10, 24, 26, 170
Pennycook, A., 6, 141, 142, 146, 174
Pica, T., 91, 125, 174
Prahbu, N. S., 24, 25, 174
Q
Quirk, R., 16, 17, 174
R

M
Maclean, J., 93, 173
Markee, N., 165, 173
Martinez, A. C. L., 41, 173
Master, P., 6, 103, 117, 173
Mauranen, A., 66, 173
McCarthy, C., 38, 45, 173
McDonald, P. F., 66, 174
McLaughlin, B., 97, 98, 173
Mead, K., 19, 172
Miller, C., 54, 55, 173
Minkoff, P., 52, 173
Mitchell, R., 96, 97, 105, 173
Munby, J., 5, 20, 136, 173
Muranoi, H., 98, 173
Murray, N., 165, 173
Myers, G., 62, 97, 173
Myles, F., 96, 105, 173
N
Nation, P., 17, 36, 169, 177
Nobe, S., 92, 174
Nurweni, A., 36, 173
O
Olive, F., 18, 168
Orlikowski, W., 55, 56, 177
Orr, T., 120, 173
Owen, J., 135, 170
P
Paltridge, B., 59, 70, 173
Parkinson, J., 102, 173

Read, J., 36, 173
Richards, J. C., 12, 13, 24, 43, 174
Riggenbach, H., 51, 174
Rignal, M., 79, 174
Robinson, P., 5, 114, 174
Robinson, P., 92, 174
Rodgers, T. S., 12, 13, 174
Roebuck, R., 106, 174
Rose, K. R., 49, 50, 172, 174
Roseberry, R., 119, 171
S
Sager, J., 66, 174
Sakr, A., 18, 174
Samraj, B., 58, 59, 174
Santos, V. B. M., 59, 174
Schmidt, R., 91, 174
Schumann, J., 85, 96, 174
Scollon, R., 38, 54, 174
Scollon, S., 38, 54, 174
Scott, H., 117, 174
Scott, J., 117, 174
Searle, J. R., 49, 175
Seedhouse, P., 125, 175
Selinker, L., 5, 175
Sengupta, S., 122, 175
Sharwood Smith, M., 91, 175
Silver, M., 71, 175
Smalkoski, K., 26, 168
Smoak, R., 165, 175
Snow, M. A., 101, 103, 109, 168, 175
St. John, M., ix, 4, 5, 25, 63, 114, 125, 139,
157, 169
Starks Martin, G., 118, 175
Stenstrom, A., 48, 175
Stern, H. H., 6, 12, 90, 113, 133, 134, 135,
137, 141, 175

182

AU T HO R I N D E X

Stritter, F., 137, 169
Strong, G., 92, 174
Swain, M., 124, 127, 175
Swales, J., 4, 5, 6, 10, 42, 43, 45, 52, 54, 56,
63, 77, 88, 135, 175
Sullivan, P., 49, 175
Svartik, J., 16, 17, 174
T
Tarone, E. S., 5, 51, 66, 175
Tauroza, S., 26, 175
Thomas, J., 48, 51, 176
Thursten, J., 68, 122, 123, 176
Tollefson, J. W., 19, 176
Tomlinson, B., 113, 115, 132, 176
Turner, J., 89, 176
U
Ur, P., 21, 176
V
van Lier, L., 106, 176
Vassileva, I., 62, 176

Waters, M., 146, 176
Watson Todd, R., 114, 132, 176
Weber, J. J., 81, 176
Webber, M., 36, 176
Wesche, M. B., 101, 103, 109, 168, 176
West, M., 36, 176
West, R., 18, 20, 29, 176
Wharton, S., 88, 89, 95, 134, 176
White, G., 37, 172
White, G., 81, 121, 122, 167
White, J., 119, 176
White, M., 71, 176
White, R., 24, 176
Whittle, J., 92, 174
Widdowson, H. G., 20, 145, 176
Willis, J., 71, 125, 176
Winter, E., 39, 176

X
Xue, G., 36, 177

Y
Yates, J., 55, 56, 177
Young, R., 91, 174

W
Z
Waters, A., 5, 20, 23, 103, 114, 137, 138, 146,
171, 176

Zhu, Y., 57, 177

Subject Index

A
Abstracts, 73
Academic writing, 62, 66, 67–68, 107, 153,
156–157
Academic genres, 54, 56–57, 58, 119–121,
143, 153, 156–157
Academic reading skills, 99, 102
Academic speaking, 50, 62, 78–80, 92, 93–95,
100–101, 117–118, 128, 130–131
Acculturation, 85–90, 96
social factors, 86
psychological factors, 86
increased social contact, 87–88
in relation to genre-based approaches,
88–90
Acquisition
genres, 88–90, 122
speech acts, 49–50
speaking skills, 92
in relation to task-based teaching, 132
Activity theory, 105–107
sociocultural theory, 105
scaffolding, 105
zone of proximal development, 105
ecological perspective, 106
learners’ goals, 107
Adjunct courses, 88–90, 96
Affective objectives, 133, 141
Analytic syllabuses, 21–22, 103–104
Appenticeship, 88–90
Assessment of specific purpose language
ability, 29, 146
Attention, 91, 139
Automaticization, 98
Autonomous functions of language education, 142
Authentic materials, 44, 81, 103–104, 114,
115, 116, 119, 152

Aviation English, 23, 49, 104, 136
Awareness raising activities, 115, 117 (see also
Consciousness-raising activities)

B
Background knowledge, 25–26, 43, 137, 138,
146
Basic language, 17

C
Case method studies, 4, 125, 131, 132 (see
also Projects)
CARS model (Create A Research Space),
56–57
Critical awareness, 5–6, 140–144, 146
contrasted with pragmatic approaches,
140–141
teaching activities, 141, 144
Critical needs analysis, 143–144
Comprehensible input, 116
Conciousness-raising activities, 115
Concordances, 63–67
used in teaching, 67–68, 71, 122–123
Content-based instruction, 101–104 (see also
Learning through content)
Controlled processing, 97–98
Common core, 15–17
Core vocabulary, 15–17, 35–38, 77–78
Cultural knowledge, 133, 138
Curricular innovation, 165

D
Data-driven approach, 9–10
Declarative knowledge, 98–99

183

184

SUBJ ECT I N DEX

Deep-end strategy, 3–4, 125, 131
Discourse communities, 3, 10, 85, 87–89, 95
Discursive consciousness, 11
Distinctive methodology, 114, 132

E
Enabling strategies, 145
English for banking, 136–137
English for business, 51, 56, 57–58, 59, 113,
126, 128–129, 137–138
English for doctors, 135–136
English for economics, 62, 63, 66–67
English for economics and business students, 86–88
English for engineering studies, 5, 18–19,
73–78, 122, 138, 140, 153, 156–162
English for finance, 151–153
English for general academic purposes,
25–26
English for law studies, 58, 134
English for medical studies, 18
English for nurses, 26–27, 71
English for science studies, 153, 156–162.
English for specific academic purposes,
25–26
Ethnographic needs analyses, 19
Explicit knowledge, 108, 115, 117, 119

F
Feedback, 126–128
Form-focused instruction, 119–120
Framework for analysis, 6–7, 12–14, 149–151
examples of use, 151–157

G
Genre, 51–61
acquisition, 88–90, 119–121, 134–135
approaches, 3–4, 81
disciplinary variation, 58
forms of social action, 52–55
procedures in analysis, 56–57
work with inside members, 58, 70
aims of instruction, 58–61, 77, 156–157
Grammatical structures and core vocabulary,
35–38, 77–78

H
Hedging, 61–64, 71, 80
History of linguistic approaches to ESP, 4–5
Humor in the workplace, 23
I
Ideological functions of language education,
142
Implicit knowledge, 130 (see also Practical
consciousness)
Indirect speech acts, 48–49
Induction models, 88–90
Input hypothesis, 90, 115
Inside members, 58
Input and interaction, 90–94, 96
interaction hypothesis, 90–91
negative feedback, 91
attention, 91
in relation to task-based teaching, 91–94
Information processing, 97–101
automaticization, 98
controlled processing, 97–98
declarative and procedural knowledge,
98–99
Input-based strategies, 114–123
predominantly input, 115–117
input to output, 117–123
input hypothesis, 90, 115
Interlanguage, 5, 124
Intramental perspectives of language learning, 97–101
K
Knowledge objectives, 133, 137–138, 139
L
Language for negotiations, 52, 137–138
Language functions, 47 (see also Speech acts)
functional syllabuses, 24, 50, 70
Language use in factory settings, 23
Language training, 20, 145–146
Learning through content, 101–104,
108–109
principles for course design, 103–104
results of content based instruction,
102–103

185

SU BJ EC T I N DEX
M
Macrostrategy for teaching, 113 (see also
Methodology)
Materials analysis, 71, 81, 113–114, 164–165
Methodology
deep-end strategies, 3–4, 114, 125, 131
distinctive methodology, 114, 132
input-based, 114–123
output-based, 123–121
Motivation, 18
Move analysis, 56–58, 122 (see also Genre,
procedures in analysis)
Task-based teaching, 5, 91–94, 125–126

N
Narrow-angle course design, 15, 25–25
English for specific academic purposes,
25–26, 44
Needs analysis, 17–20, 135–136
communicative needs processor, 136
critical needs analysis, 20, 143–144
criticisms of needs analyses, 19–20, 142
objective and subjective needs, 19
perceptions of needs, 18–20
ethnographic analyses, 19
Negative feedback, 91
Nonverbal communication, 117
Noticing, 115

O
On-site language teaching, 96, 151–153
Output-based strategies, 123–121
predominantly output, 124–126
output to input, 126–131
output hypothesis, 124–125
Output hypothesis, 124–125

P
Patterns of text organization, 38–43, 45
effects on reading comprehension, 41–42
problem-solution, 39, 42–43
general-specific, 40–41, 44
cultural variation, 40–41
Performance competencies, 145, 146

Pre-experience and/or post-experience
learners, 19, 43, 114, 132, 139, 104 (see
also Background knowledge)
Projects, 104, 125–126, 131
Politeness, 61
Positive evidence, 115
Practical consciousness, 11, 114
Pragmalinguistics, 49
Pragmatic meaning, 48
Procedural knowledge, 98–99
Product and process approaches to teaching
writing, 81, 122
Proficiency objectives, 133, 135, 145
Proposals, 59–61

R
Real world tasks, 25, 92, 93–94 (see also Methodology, task-based)
Register, 4–5, 35, 63
Restricted language, 17, 20
repertoire, 136
Rights analysis, 143–144 (see also critical
needs analysis)
Role play, 113, 152

S
Scaffolding, 105
Schema theory, 38, 45
Script theory, 38, 45
Scientific discourse, 5, 35, 56, 62
Simulations, 4, 126
Social action, 52–55
Social interaction, 61–63
theory of politeness, 61
hedging, 61–63, 71, 80
Sociocultural theory, 105, 109
Sociopragmatics, 49–50
Specific elements in ESP, 26–28
Specifiable elements in ESP, 26–28
Specific purpose language ability, 137, 138
Speech acts, 22, 47–51
acquisition, 49–50
pragmatic meaning, 48
indirectness, 48–49
instruction in, 50–51, 71, 78–79, 152–153
pragmalinguistics, 49
sociopragmatics, 49–50, 137–138

186

SUBJ ECT I N DEX

Social contact, 87–88
Social functions of language, 22–23
Strategic competence, 138–140, 146
Strategy training, 99, 108
Structuration Theory, 10–12,
practical consciousness, 11
discursive consciousness, 11
Subject specialists, 131, 139–140 (see also
Genre, work with inside members)
Subject specific language use, 5, 134–135
Synthetic syllabuses, 21–22, 103–104

T
Target discourse communities, 3–4, 85, 88
(see also Discourse communities)
Target performance competencies, 135–137
Target needs, 114 (see also Needs analysis)
Task-based instruction, 24–25, 92–94,
125–126, 132
Teacher education, ix, 4, 146
Team teaching, 114, 139–140, 146
Technical English, 36
Time efficient, 9, 18
Top down approaches, 43
Transfer objectives, 133
Types of syllabuses, 20–25
analytic, 21–22, 103–104
synthetic, 21–22, 103–104
task-based, 24–25, 92–93, 96

U
Underlying competence, 5
Underlying knowledge, 137–138, 146 (see
also Underlying competence)
V
Varieties of language, 15–17 (see also Register)
common core, 15–17 (see also Basic
language)
all language as specific purpose, 15–17
Vocabulary
academic vocabulary, 36, 44
discipline specific meanings, 63–66, 70,
71, 152–153
concordances, 63–68, 71, 81
core vocabulary, 35–38, 77–78
W
Wide-angle course designs, 15, 25–26
english for general academic purposes,
25–26, 44
Workplace meetings, 128–129
Z
Zone of proximal development, 105

